# Persistent Democracy

> This post is just intuitively introduces the concept of Persistent Democracy and its applications. If you're interested in a more rigorous definition and defense of the idea, please check out [the theory section](TODO theories).
> This post is a work-in-progress draft of a chapter in the next version of the Hopeful Pathway book.

The purpose of Persistent Democracy is to create a system of group decision making that is the most expressive, flexible, and accurate it could possibly be. To do this, Persistent Democracy uses one core idea: every person in a cooperative group has some arbitrary number of "decision weights" they use for voting:

- Each person can move their weights around at any time, rather than having to wait for an election event to come and go.
- Each person can move around different amounts of these weights to effect the outcome of different decisions, so they can put more on decisions they care more about.
- Weights can be used as a negative vote, meaning you can vote *against* something.
- Weights are "moved" rather than "spent", so using weights to influence decisions doesn't change how many weights you have.
- The exact number of weights each person has doesn't matter, since weights can be split up by placing a decimal quantity such as `0.5` on a decision.
- In an equal democracy, each person has the same number of weights and so has the same amount of decision power. It might make sense for private organizations to use structures where different members have different numbers of weights.

The basic idea of giving each person a number of decision weights that can be moved around at any time is the only assumption of Persistent Democracy.

However, there are many different ways for these weights to actually *effect* decisions, and different ways are better for making different kinds of decisions! We could design any system to use weights to make any kind of decision, but there are two important ones we want to talk about now:

- Persistent Voting for making decisions that are reversible.
- Persistent Commitments for making decisions that require some sacrifice and so aren't reversible.

# Persistent Voting

There are many decisions we would call "reversible", meaning we can change our minds and make a different decision at any time. Basically all our elections for public servants such as mayors, police chiefs, sanitation commissioners, etc, are all reversible decisions. These people are just employees of our shared governance bodies, and in the same way we allow private companies to replace their employees at basically any time, we should be able to replace our public servants at any time. Persistent Voting just changes a decision to be ongoing rather than happening in a single irreversible event, so we still have to choose some "inner" voting method that's used to actually add up votes. Possible options include pure [Quadratic Voting](TODO), some variant of it like [Quadratic Range Voting](TODO), or any other voting method that takes different amounts of weights into account.

However it would be inefficient and chaotic to allow changes to be made *too* quickly (it wouldn't be great for the mayor to change four times in a hour). So we should design some stabilization method that keeps the current winner from switching too quickly. You can find the precise details of the stabilization method we've designed in [the theory section](TODO), but generally we've taken some inspiration from [Conviction Voting](TODO) to design a method that follows these principles:

- If a new candidate pulls ahead of the current winner, they begin to fill up some "stabilization bucket". If they fill up the entire bucket they become the new current winner of the position.
- If the new candidate has a bigger vote advantage they fill up the stabilization bucket faster.
- If the new candidate loses their vote advantage, the stabilization bucket begins to drain based on the size of the new gap.

We'll talk about how the size of these stabilization buckets is determined in a later section. In general we want more important decisions that effect more people to have bigger stabilization buckets and therefore need more weight to change.

It also wouldn't be great for the vote differences to be published instantly, since it would be annoying and stressful for people to worry about what vote changes might be happening at all different hours. For this reason we should choose some sort of "update rhythm", basically the times and days where the current state of all votes is actually tabulated and published. This would allow each member to only worry about their votes at most one time in every update cycle.

<!-- - Update Time, the rhythm of time in which vote changes are actually published and take effect. So for example if the Vote Cycle is for votes to be updated every day at 12:00 UTC, then a voter could change their vote four times in a day before that time and only the final state would actually have an effect on elections. This cycle would exist just to encourage
- Change Time, the rhythm of time in which actual position changes are made. So for example if the Change Time is every Monday at 7:00 UTC, then that's when any new winners actually take over their positions.

- If *multiple* new candidates overtake the current winner, they each fill up their own stabilization bucket individually, and whichever of them fills theirs up first becomes the new winner.

True ties are handled by no one occupying the position! Votes can be changed very quickly though, so true ties should very rarely last long. -->

Persistent voting is exciting because it allows true direct democracy to be efficient and stable. Since voters can change their vote in any election at any time, they can participate in only the decisions they're actually concerned about while leaving other decisions for other voters. Many more decisions could be made democratically without overwhelming everyone.

It even allows "auto-pilot democracy", where low voter turnout is essentially a nonissue. If some concerned minority makes most of the electoral choices, and everyone else is perfectly fine with those choices, then the majority can just not participate without worry. If the concerned minority begins making harmful or foolish choices, the rest of society can quickly override them before harm is done.

Persistent voting can even be used to select *documents*, such as constitutions, tax codes, legal definitions, or anything else. These elections work the same way as those for officials, where voters nominate documents to add them to the election and whichever document has the current greatest amount of support is the one that's in effect.

We [theorize](TODO) that persistent voting will have many massive benefits:

- Allows groups to more quickly discover new options and converge toward decisions that are better for everyone.
- Removes regretful strategic voting or "election hangovers", since negative surprises can just be counteracted before they do harm.
- Positive surprises are also much more possible, since their possibility can be detected and reinforced more easily.
- Makes it way more expensive to "buy" an election with media blitzes or fake stories.
- Elections would be less sensitive to noise, politicking, campaigning, and predictions about the outcome.
- Would allow more complex voting methods, since voters have unlimited time to think about and understand how they wish to vote.

# Persistent Commitments

Not all decisions are reversible! Many of the most consequential decisions we make, such as all those that spend resources, are irreversible.

Persistent Democracy can still be used to make irreversible decisions, it just has to do so more carefully. The whole point of persistent voting is that it removes election deadlines, which are dangerous because they create sensitive "strategic windows" where bad actors can stir up noise and skew results. With true commitments we can't avoid some sort of deadlines, but we can mitigate them by leaning all the way into the principles of [conviction voting](TODO). Here's how a persistent commitment works, visit the [theory page](TODO) for the exact details:

- Each commitment has a deadline. Some commitments are cyclical such as those for budget periods, but other commitments might only happen once.
- During the voting period before the deadline, voters can move around their weights to nominate and vote for "decision documents" that say what should be done in the commitment. For example a budget commitment would choose the budget document.
- However instead of using stabilization buckets and a current winner as is done in persistent voting, particular choices instead *accumulate* votes as the deadline approaches.
- If a voter has kept some weights on the same option for longer then their weights are stronger.
- If a voter removes weights from an option, the weight moves slowly from the old to the new instead of happening immediately.
- When the deadline hits, whichever option is the winner is chosen.

This process is designed to reward durable and consistent voting, and to prevent weird strategic swings or surprises right before the deadline. Since commitments have to be made more carefully we want to err on the side of choices that are better understood, even possibly choosing to "do nothing"!

In most types of commitments, options only accumulate weight *during* the cycle itself. But in cycles like those used in [persistent funding](TODO), options can accumulate weight over their entire life until they're chosen and funded.

<!--
Each commitment would have some deadline for the electorate to choose some "decision document". Each commitment should have a default document that is considered the "winner", and any new document must overtake that document using stabilization buckets in order to be implemented. This default document would be decided by whatever election defined the existence of this commitment. This default document could very easily be "do nothing".
wait blaine, what size stabilization bucket would this default document have? maybe these should just be normal conviction voting cycles, and people have to actually endorse the default document?

If a persistent voting style change could possibly require an outlay of resource from something like a budget, then perhaps that means we should make the change time equivalent to the time necessary to put that outlay together? And possibly even require with dependent types that if such a change happens the next budget must include an item for this change?

The thing I think we have to remember is that we're just trusting democracy! People will bring up any truly concerning problems if they're at all possibly predictable. It's unwise of us to think we can predict everything this system might have to account for. That's why we're enabling it to be changed by voters!
-->

# Constitutional Persistent Democracy

Any cooperative group has some "constitution" that defines at the very top level what their rules are. Sometimes these consitutions aren't actually written down but just implied by culture and norms, but cooperation is [more transaparent and therefore more fair](https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/contra-weyl-on-technocracy) when the rules are clearly written down, so we think we should use constitutions.

The beauty of using persistent voting to select constitutions is that a cooperative group can structure their rules in any way they feel is convenient and useful, and then change them as soon as they want to. If a cooperative group feels they'd rather make fewer directly democratic decisions but instead delegate to elected officials, they can do that. If they realize they'd rather make certain decisions directly but delegate others, they can do that.

Interestingly, groups could choose to create portions of their constitution *that can't be changed*. We call these portions "constitutional kernels", and they essentially make it impossible to change those rules without throwing away the existing system and creating a new one. In general we think they're probably a bad idea for governments, they might make sense for certain kinds of private organizations.

Let's also ask this question: if you have a constitution selected with persistent voting, should it be possible to change *the fact that the constitution is selected with persistent voting*? A decision that changes how changes are made is irreversible in a way, since the new selection method might not allow you to go back to what you had before. A constitution could place this very top level rule in a "commitment kernels", a portion of the document that can only be changed using a persistent commitment rather than at any time. Again, visit [the theory page](TODO) if you're interested in the fine details of questions like this.

<!--
This is an interesting question to consider: *should* we design constitutions with kernels? I'm still not sure about all the ramifications of this idea, but there are some things to consider:

- If a group is *certain* they'll never want to change some aspect of their governance, perhaps because they've found a logical proof the aspect is perfect or optimal in some way, then it can make sense.
- If a group is essentially encoding their non-negotiable values into the kernel.
- If a group isn't very high stakes or  and they don't want to get bogged down with certain kinds of decisions.
- If a group is just experimenting with kernels.

of course another thing to consider is *how difficult* it is to change the rules of change. you could design a constitution that made it so difficult to change certain aspects that those aspects were *effectively* in the kernel. This honestly seems like a good way to design most constitutions. Make it *possible* to change everything, but make some aspects so difficult to change that any proposed change would basically have to be universally agreed upon before it could happen.
-->

Constitutions can contain other constitutions much in the way nesting dolls contain other nesting dolls. You can write a constitution that allows "sub-constitutions" to be created underneath it for more specific areas of decision making. Upper constitutions can limit the power of sub-constitutions, such as to enforce rights or limit jurisdiction. This fits really nicely with things like federated administration, since every level can divide up the area underneath it to delegate responsibility.

This nesting gives us a natural way to decide how big things like stabilization buckets should be. Decisions that effect more people should have larger stabilization buckets and so be more difficult to change. Oppositely, if a constitution allows more directly democratic decisions, then each individual decision should have a smaller stabilization bucket and so be easier to change, since the group is deciding that each person is effectively delegating more decisions to other people.

These rules lead to very intuitively reasonable situation, visit [the theory page](TODO) for more details:

- Decisions such as a top level constitution effect more people and are the only decision at their level, so they're more difficult to change.
- Lower level decisions involve fewer people and have more "sibling" decisions at their same level, to they're easier to change.

<!--
Consider the situation where some group is in perfect agreement about wanting to change their highest level document, and in perfect agreement about which document they want to replace it with. If they want to do this, we can assume for simplicity's sake that the sub-decisions the current document defines aren't the right ones. If they thought this, each person would place all of their weights on the same new document, and this situation is clearly the one that should happen the fastest possible, since the entire group is in perfect agreement. This number defines the size of the stabilization bucket! The size should be amount of accrued vote as if every member of the group was in perfect agreement. This means we've defined stabilization as a sort of "time-based delegation".

Then at lower levels where there are more decisions to make, we should divide the size of the stabilization buckets by the number of decisions, meaning that each decision can be made with less consensus.
It's unclear if the number of decisions should include all *higher* decisions or only the ones that the current level.
We want higher up decisions to only be diluted by even higher decisions rather than lower decisions.

If the layers divide up the electorate into smaller groups, then that nicely handles resizing the importance of decisions made by those smaller groups.

We can put these three things together to decide the size of stabilization buckets. If all the members of a group were in perfect agreement with each other on all issues at some layer of governance, only cared about that layer of governance, and cared about each decision at that layer equally, then they would divide their weights equally to select a single candidate in each decision at that layer. Since those candidates would be perfectly agreed upon, each should be made the winner as fast as possible
-->

These constitutions would define what decisions are made with persistent voting or commitments or any other method. Visit [the page about miscellaneous methods](TODO) if you want more ideas for ways persistent weights could be used.

<!-- prioritizing finite resources, prioritizing project funding, offsetting taxes, asserting ownership, or endorsing people for public service. -->

# Comparison with Liquid Democracy

Both persistent and liquid democracy are really trying to achieve the same thing. Both want to make direct democracy possible by making it possible in principle for every person to effect every group decision. [Liquid democracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_democracy) does this by allowing voters to delegate their votes to some other person, who can then delegate them again, and so on.

We feel this system doesn't offer any unique benefits that aren't also enjoyed by persistent democracy, and could fall victim to a pretty nasty problem: "lazy demagoguery". Liquid democracy would make it easy for a voter to just delegate huge amounts of their votes to someone they shallowly like such as a media personality, and never bother to check on what those votes are being used for. Those kinds of concentrations of voting power would be a problematic vulnerability, and are totally avoidable.

Persistent democracy just as powerfully supports delegation as liquid democracy, but in a simpler way: "delegation by abstention". If you don't care about an issue, just don't vote on it and allow others to make the decision! You can always change your mind and move your weights around, and the exact stabilization bucket system is designed to make more important decisions take longer to change, giving you more time to notice them if they're important.

No system can ever change the fact that people will listen to others and be swayed by their opinions, so no matter what there will be some amount of "delegation by persuasion". It's unnecessary to directly encode delegation into the system itself when we can just allow natural delegation in a simpler design. We ought to require that a voter actually changes their votes themselves, whatever that means in a particular system.







































# How do we fix everything?

All of these problems are unacceptable, and many of them are of existential importance.
But they're all secretly the same problem! They're all problems related to our ability to cooperate with each other and make group decisions.
We can think of our group decision making ability as a piece of technology we use. Voting is just a piece of technology, a mathematical tool we use to boil down the complexity of each person's wants and needs and preferences into simple numbers that can just be added up.






If any group of people wants to cooperate with each other, the most important decision they must make is *how they will make decisions*! We have many different systems to do this, but they all fall short in some way.


# Anonymous traits, shapes, and inferred generics: How we can make typed languages just as light and user friendly as untyped ones with the next level of type inference.

nominal types are good, so they should still be around, but we shouldn't require the creation of a new nominal type for every situation. rust already does this with traits and things like anonymous tuple types.
shapes are basically just anonymous "structural traits" that the user doesn't have to explicitly opt into


# Computable legal code
a body of laws is just a "codebase" for how to make decisions. it's just like a computer program, except that instead of running in a computer with precisely defined rules, it runs in human brains and institutions.

the exciting thing about this idea is that if we define a body of laws as a computable language, then we can use that code to *literally* run the organization, by creating actual server code to do things like run votes and allow forms, etc.




# Using Persistent Democracy to govern and fund blockchain projects
You can mix the idea of user defined organizations with persistent voting by having the voting weights accrued by purchases decay in some way as they age.

The kernel basically answers the question of how much we can change without simply forking. For blockchain projects, that's probably *only* the decision of who voters are and how their voting power is allocated. After that, how their voting power is *used* can be defined arbitrarily with a persistent constitution. the kernel can allow finer parameters of that process to be delegated to lower decisions. it can also define exactly how a fork can occur! if the kernel allows some kind of change to itself, then again the community is defining how it can fork itself gracefully.
Some governance changes are tantamount to a fork, since they might change how voting power is allocated!


# We don't need to subvert our governments, we need to fix them: How crypto-libertarianism has coopted decentralization, and why that is a bad thing.

Talking about political party, we don't need to subvert government we need to fix it
financialization is a bad thing

# If we can already build cooperatives, is decentralization just getting in the way?
hot take, speculation is bad.

What if cooperatives are good enough, and DAOs and blockchains are just getting in the way?
We need to consider if we actually need to decentralize our systems rather than just democratically controlling centralized ones.







# With most definitions of capitalism, it's an inefficient and bankrupt ideology, (and when it isn't, that's because it's actually socialism)
or at least the irrational warriors of capitalism would say it is


# Plotting a course to a global mega-cooperative: it's time to take it all back

cooperatives don't have a bootstrapping problem, they have a scale of control problem
if there were a large mega cooperative that had democratic methods to allocating funds to community valued projects, then we wouldn't have any problem at all bootstrapping cooperatives. however, *that* mega cooperative itself must be bootstrapped

# Plotting a course toward verified ethical foundations for rights and governance

I need more formally define the theories of welfare and universes and predictions

There's a lot of improvements and changes I'm intending to make, mostly relating to more specificity for persistent voting (things like "filling the consensus bucket", how that works, and more ideas about what "update intervals" a group has to choose) and integrating conviction voting into the persistent commitments concepts. After you asked about the strategy conjectures I was planning of giving the answer I more or less sketched in the book (I don't really know, I need to do research about if there are cycles, etc), but I slowly agreed with you that the claims I was making weren't very convincing yet, and so I've been chewing on all this for the last week or so, and have finally come up with something I'm willing to say ha
I think part of the problem here is that the existing theory around strategy and voting are all very discrete. even infinite games probably don't really concern themselves with real persistent continuousness, so I'm not aware (as a self-taught newcomer to the field) of any existing tools that can think in this way. If I was going to prove all of this, here's what I think I might do to avoid arbitary dimensional preference spaces
It's nice that persistent democracy is truly direct democracy, and that *every* single decision in the societal cooperative can possibly be made directly. This means we can represent each voters preferences with a simple "total" decision document, one that specifies everything this voter cares about with some arbitrary "social function", possibly with "null" or "identity" spots where this voter simply says "I don't care, delegate to everyone else". then we can understand their degree of satisfaction with the current status quo as some kind of "behavioral diff", or the amount of changes or edits required to make the current status quo behave exactly like their internal ideal. this is kinda fuzzy, and probably should focus more on outcomes on the "universe" vector rather than the actual "code" (the logical idea of functional extensionality can be applied to these diffs)
I would want a theory of universe vectors and rounds of mutation actions to reason from first principles.
so their internal ideal is a social decision function that they predict is most likely to follow some trajectory they most prefer.

Again all of this is very vague and in my head! I'm not an expert in this field, and have been deeply working on Magmide like I said. I've found it very difficult to make progress on these very tricky philosophical and game theoretical ideas while also holding a normal full-time software job and being a father ha. Hint hint, if any of you

1. At this point I haven't even tried to prove any of the conjectures I make in the book, . The conjecture I make isn't that it will "reduce" strategic voting per-se (Gibbard' theorem tells us it's impossible to completely remove), but that it just helps to *reveal* voters' real preferences more quickly, and allow each voter to choose the strategy of their vote that is satisfying to them given the entire collection of decisions they could choose to participate in. The original mathematical statement of QV also doesn't say that it removes strategy, but
As for building a proof,

I'm now thinking that persistent voting doesn't actually reduce strategic voting, but merely makes it inconsequential. the real problem with strategic voting is that it produces "incorrect" votes that the voter ends up regretting, or where they could have made some other choice that would have served them better. in real elections those kinds of problems are very deeply concerning, since their vote is set in stone and the decision has been made. with persistent voting they can simply adjust their vote to be more competitive after getting more information.
this is why it seems very very important to use an expressive and monotonic *inner* voting method. that monotinicity itself seems like the very property that will prevent "cycles", since it will allow the durable expression of the most sincere preferences while the more "strategic" ones are allowed to fluctuate somewhat with the competitive landscape.
conviction voting is probably the most correct thing to use for any irreversible commitment, it's become very clear to me after the last little while that intelligently blending persistent and conviction paradigms is the best way to achieve this balance.
probably the real true shift of perspective is merely saying that *direct* democracy is the thing we should be striving for! all of these different mechanisms are just ways of trying to scale direct democracy so it actually works.
in general I think I'm also trying to design all of this so that instead of thinking about *conflict* between different candidates in any decision, we're thinking about *negotiation* as the persistent mechanism promotes *discovery* of new options that have the power to quickly gain approval from all concerned parties. we're trying to find a system that quickly adjusts to discover the best acceptable option.
I'm conjecturing the presence of some equilibrium state in the preferences of the voters, one where each person has allocated their vote in a way that maximizes their satisfaction with its allocation, even if that allocation isn't perfectly representative of their real preferences. this equilibrium is one in which all votes are attaining their highest "return on investment" based on the competitiveness of the decision they're in compared with how concerned the voter is. it's the "likelihood of being pivotal"
and besides
and very importantly, probably the *real* thing that makes persistent voting stand out above other paradigms is that it maximizes the amount of control a group has over their cooperative mechanisms, since they *directly* control every single aspect in some way or another. the cooperative rules are a real representation of their current consensus

Yeah, I haven't spent much time finding concrete evidence for those claims, likely a future version of the book should do so!

if you use a monotonic voting method, then voters will never state a higher preference for some "strategic" candidate vs their favorite one. this means that "favorite" preferences will always be fully revealed, and possible best outcomes always discovered maximally quickly.

if some set of coalitions have a favorite candidate who is also a welfare consensus candidate, they will quickly win as those coalitions discover the possibility of that candidate's win and demote strategic candidate's

my hunch is that if there's any property that can guarantee a persistent vote will always converge to some optimal state, it's monotinicity.


if a voting method forces to choose between fully and accurately expressing preferences and finding the highest welfare choice, we should prioritize finding highest welfare choice. this means we're not really concerned with the presence of strategy, but really between a mismatch between the *truly* most strategically fit vote and voters' *predicted* most strategically fit vote.


persistent democracy is likely a welfare optimal construction because it is a direct representation of the concept of focus and welfare concern across time, which is the thing we're trying to maximize.



# Compute cooperatives
this is the opposite of a blockchain with a dictator, we have the important governance kind of decentralization but the benefits of architectural centralization

rather than accounts with services, we just want access to programs that we can run on data wherever we happen to keep it
persistence agnostic applications

# Proof of social trust

in decentralized technologies, both unique personhood and consensus are the really big *core* problems. this idea attempts to use them to solve *each other*. proof of work is disastrous, proof of stake still prizes money holding and therefore creates plutocracy
hunter-gatherer societies (the kind of society the human brain is most adapted to) are essentially cooperatives, where each member is expected to contribute and help the whole group, and in return receives the benefits of the group's coordination. there are strict ideas of mutual obligation and responsibility, and violating these important rules can lead to serious consequences such as exile or even death.
we could use this idea of mutual obligation to verify transactions in a decentralized network, where the scarcity of true trust and concern in human relationships is the source of scarcity.
the network would start with a seed of people who are known to be real humans and are trustworthy in the sense that they won't use a faulty or fraudulent implementation of the protocol. then in order to join the network, you have to be referred by an existing member of the network.
very importantly, we should intentionally structure the network so that there are only financial/economic costs to referring new people to the network! meaning that it is financially/economically **irrational** to do so. this would mean that people would only do so if there was some other kind of reason to, with the intended reasons being that you genuinely care about and trust this person, so really only meant for trusted family and friends.
if you refer someone in, and they commit some kind of fraud or shirk their duties to the network or are found to not be a unique human then you will be punished as well. the offending account would be completely exiled, with only some trial mechanism to claim that you were hacked or coerced being the way to gain entry again, and that account can't ever refer people into the network. This is almost like you’re getting your reputation slashed instead of getting money slashed
other properties:
want referring people into the network to be slow on purpose, even perhaps limited to a hard number of people per referrer, or only allowing each set of referrers to be used once.
can use "seals" to track most consensus amounts instead of keeping everything on a global chain, so instead of a single global ledger it’s more of a “tangle”. could allow for extremely fast throughput
this design would also enable zero transaction fees, since verification is incentivized through mutual obligation rather than financial reward
there is a random beacon chain used to coordinate the membership chain, which basically only tracks membership and their standing
the random beacon chain is used to "partition" the chain at certain epochs, determining quorums that need to verify transactions based on hash
accounts have an obligation to the network to perform audits and verifications, which if they shirk lowers their standing, possibly resulting in exile?
having a low standing could also simply increase the number of quorums who have to verify your transactions, so shirkers and those who try to refer more accounts into the network are less trusted than others and have to be watched more closely.
someone has to build up positive standing by *over* serving the network in order to refer people into the network
Importantly, this “standing” must be non-tradable, so you can’t buy it or gain it in any other way than by serving the network
possible spam volume is dealt with by putting most of the verification effort on transaction initiators and the people who referred them into the network, so those who create traffic are most burdened by it. importantly, people *you* refer into the network can't verify your transactions, since that would give you a benefit for referring them.
all of this could be amenable to privacy with zero-knowledge proofs, but I'm agnostic to those details at this point :)
this is a very rough idea, in order for it to make sense there are a ton of game-theoretical and network liveness questions to answer, and a huge number of devils in the details. perhaps one of you readers has the time/willingness/skills to tackle some of them!





the saas model allowed private companies to seize control of the internet: here's how we take with back using with persistent democracy and compute cooperatives
landlords are purely extractive middlemen who add no value to society: here's how we get rid of them with persistent democracy and common resource taxes
fixing the global housing crisis is easy, we just need to completely reform how we think about voting, public goods, and property ownership (sigh)

Daos aren't novel really, cooperatives have existed for 150 years. The cryptographic transparency is the only thing it adds, but that's definitely
something







how to fix everything essays
get summary and survey books, blinkist, and sparks notes to get through political theory and philosophy and history books faster to get the ideas, include these "summaries of summaries" as the first versions of some of the first book references
how to fix everything website
theories of voting
theories of democratic consensus
theories of democratic attention market
proofs of philosophy and rights system
write thorough outlines of how you want to describe project in readme and site home
get design and aesthetics good enough to share
get functionality working to list page summaries on index pages
write outlines of overviews of all sections
finalize all writing enough to share

social network member cooperative
journalism member cooperative
the member cooperative social network/bazaar thing
a house-exchange/couchsurfing/airbnb member cooperative, with fair/efficient democratic governance
alliance of member cooperatives has been formalized and created, along with the charter for an attached for-profit (or non-profit if that is possible) "strike-force" organization whose purpose is to produce technology innovation in ways that enhance the social mission but also potentially can extract wealth from and compete directly with large corporations
a credit union capable of enabling rent-to-own mortgages, housing cooperative projects, social ventures, etc has been created


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_land_trust
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_value_tax
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxation_in_Taiwan
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxation_in_Estonia#Land_Value_Tax
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_value_tax_in_the_United_States
https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2019/04/henry-georges-single-tax-could-combat-inequality/587197/
https://transportist.org/2013/08/17/altoona-pennsylvania-adopts-land-value-tax/

https://www.brookings.edu/research/whos-to-blame-for-high-housing-costs-its-more-complicated-than-you-think/
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/06/18/upshot/cities-across-america-question-single-family-zoning.html
https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/census/historic/ownrate.html


https://bfi.uchicago.edu/wp-content/uploads/Plassmann_Tideman_MCP-and-Quadratic-Voting.pdf

https://www.opensourceecology.org/

humane architecture should be included here
https://www.strongtowns.org/journal/2018/7/2/we-should-be-building-cities-for-people-not-cars
https://www.strongtowns.org/journal/2021/1/6/college-campuses-as-a-model-for-urban-planning
https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2017/02/10/the-happy-city/

trials to prove facts could be called corroboration trials
It's confidence that spreads, not the truth

automating rigor, why coding ate the world and why proof checkers will democratize academia
the interference/dependency field: a tentative theory of rights (say in that post that you want to go deeper into ethics)
the universe wager: a theory of optimal secular meaning
nihilist, psychopathic, and saintly universes: a tentative theory of ethics
my dream for a mainstream verification language. platinum is to coq as rust is to java
you're most helpful to the world when you're happy, health, stable, and productive
we're not here to sound smart, we're here to create and explain useful ideas














The Shapley Value, a way of determining the compensation to a member of a group for their contributions
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qcLZMYPdpH4&list=PLeY-lFPWgBTif4PmLSN8eJsfOhFv_QUPl&index=3&ab_channel=GameTheoryOnline


when you create some work of political argument, ask yourself what might happen if you sent it to a religious conservative. would they be moved closer to you, not at all, or even further away? then ask yourself who this is for and what it's trying to accomplish.

constitutions describe the boundaries of when violence will be used to enforce decisions and values, what kinds of decisios are allowed, and how they are made.


Voting reform is required to save our democracy, but not the voting reform actually being considered
Our biggest problem isn't that our democratic mechanisms are poorly designed, it's that a big chunk of our population has been converted to fascism
it is foolish to assume a single top-down index measurement can forever measure a society's prosperity. the important thing is that the people are truly in control, and can add new metrics as their values change, and leave interpretation to a diversity of philosophical voices in the community



financialization of everything seems toxic to me, likely because it almost entirely focuses on ownership and investment instead of useful labor

A regulation is just a clarification of the boundaries of some rights, and how those boundaries are enforced in practice

There are no big or small governments, only correct and incorrect ones

Science is good, but big corporations aren't. We have to remember they aren't the same thing. Our bad system of patents has tied them together, but it doesn't have to be that way

Figuring out the best ways for small groups to coordinate is almost entirely emotional, about understanding what individual people want and what will make them feel good. And smaller groups tend to be more specific, have greater need for high context.
But the bigger and more abstract a group becomes, the more we have to rely on math and logic and theory to guide us, and simplified models of what people want, because that's the only way we can manage that complexity.
The most important and difficult question for humanity to answer as we grow is how can we best coordinate. That's how we've achieved everything we have so far, and that's how we can overcome the obstacles we face today


Democracy isn't broken, plurality voting is

scarcity is rooted in the cold reality of atoms. trying to either create scarcity where there isn't truly any or pretend there isn't scarcity even when there is will lead to eventual problems




Two way surplus, when both supply and demand are comfortable and have enough. Buyers get much more value from the good than it costs to buy, and sellers get much more money than it costs to make.
This almost always happens when our collective technological leverage is very high, and the cost to provide something is simply so low that it's a tiny percentage of buyers purchasing power.
Profit seeking companies don't have an incentive to create this situation, but instead to package goods both physically and psychologically in a way that allows them to artificially and irrationally raise their price to the maximum tolerable level.
Cooperatives and nationalized companies can use these situations combined with subscription pricing and quotas to create situations like these, where people have goods and pay little in taxes or membership fees, but more than strictly necessary for the goods, allowing the institutions to create increased public good value with their side of the surplus












the book is targeted at a general audience, and points to rigorous and fully formal `theories` and one-off `posts` that examine questions and applications that are too specific for the book.

so there should be a small number of quite deep chapters that point to `theories` and `posts` if people want to dive deeper.

chapters:

- introduction
  - problems in the world, how I discovered hope
  - humanity's power comes from cooperation, and the methods we use to cooperate are just like a technology we can improve
  - we improve technologies with logical and scientific rigor, so it's reasonable to be more confident in one system of cooperation than another
  - but we still have to persuade people to cooperate and use these methods! we hope that them being more logically rigorous is good enough, but it frequently isn't, so we need to be pragmatic
  - this is the goal of this book, to propose better methods of cooperation, and get people all working together to improve them, rigorously verify them, and build real world movements and organizations that use them.
  - here are the main ideas, and hints about how they could help us end corporatism and consumerism, create shared prosperity, dissolve all monopolies including ones of intellectual property, create a more cohesive and emotionally harmonious culture, allow us to respond to the climate crisis, deradicalize fascists and fundamentalists,
  - the chapters aren't strictly categorized, and are just in the order we felt it was most natural and understandable. but there are a few broad themes: are there any obvious changes we can do right away? how can we take action in the economy in ways that don't require achieving political change? what should our government look like?
  - this is an open source book
- score voting systems: approval voting is an obvious change we can make right away. points to other resources, a talk about why approval is better than ranked choice.
- resource voting systems and quadratic scaling: handling different levels of concern and shared costs
- persistent democracy: the principle of persistent weights, using persistent voting to solve common cooperation problems. this goes over the obvious and easy to explain ones, and hints at more involved uses
- democratic funding

- provably correct software
- computable governance code
- cryptographic transparency
- coordination theory

- economic cooperatives and economic activism
- persistently democratic member cooperative: building an economic institution to fight on our behalf
  - economic foundations, starting as an online-first credit union
  - journalism and media
  - internet, computing hinting at separate essay about misdirected blockchain enthusiasm, hint at public forum
  - housing
  - education

- democratic public forum

- persistently democratic political party: building a political institution to fight on our behalf

- minimum necessary rights
- markets and rights
- common resource taxes
- wealth taxes
- crowdsell intellectual property
- democratic districts
- free borders
- persistent logistics
- democratic adjudication
- misinformation rights
- universal voluntary constitution

- universities and coworking
- sustainability and anti-consumerism
- cohousing and urban planning

- climate action
  - especially nuclear power
  - already discussed externality and common resource taxes, so discuss carbon cap-and-trade, just like with sulfur-dioxide
- persuasive action




posts:

- waiting out the blockchain hype

formal theories:

- welfare theory
- progress theory
- proof of social trust



footnotes that actually have text suck. better to have a collapsible element, or just use parentheses! true footnotes would just be possible links someone might find interesting *after* they're done reading your stuff


Retaking scale
Rigor and realism

There's no such thing as socialism or capitalism, only rights and public goods
and rights are only just another public good!

A noise and bot resistant public forum
Chaotic noise is inherently dangerous
https://onezero.medium.com/redirecting-the-techlash-74065169b352
We must absolutely destroy consumerism, but we can't live without industrialism

Giving profit incentives to do something positive is just allowing middle men to make money without doing anything real. They're just going to hire labor so all they can possibly do is make choices we should just make choices directly with persistent mechanisms

It's important to understand how we know things. Mathematical proof is one way, experience through experimentation is another. Whether our knowledge is persuasive is another matter we'll address later

Part of what makes corporations so powerful is that they don't require they much coordination. All the buyers just make simple self interested decisions and that powers the system forward
Member cooperatives inherit most of that advantage. Most members don't have to be super involved or vote that much, they just pay dues and get value in return
The big difference is in activation energy. For profit businesses get started because of greed, so again very little coordination is ultimately needed. Member cooperatives can be just as self sustaining, but they need activists to get the ball rolling

Ethical values vs organizational values
ethical values
Democratic ownership and control
Compassionate humanism, people are an end in themselves
Empirical humility


organizational values
Embracing and reclaim scientific rigor and industrial scale
Using empathetic persuasion, but be rigorous and detailed and show our work

Climate actions
Nuclear power
Cloud seeding
Methane control
Reforestation and rewilding
Cities with more plants

Wealth taxes can be thought of as a necessary way of avoiding market power, since a massive concentration of wealth creates market power in ALL markets. These players can exert market power by overwhelming the marginal utility function of key competitors and making their potential competition moot




main ideas
coordination is our superpower, and at large scales our coordination systems are a piece of technology rather than an intuitive part of our psychology
mathematical logic is the science behind improving our coordination systems, so we must use and trust them when doing *design*
but mathematical logic isn't effective at *persuading* people of the efficiency of these systems. we have to understand effective persuasion and aggressively pursue it


move logic chapter to blog, replace with the general initiative of first rigorously proving our ideas before verifying them, in order to be more confident when we try to persuade. first chapter instead talks about proof assistants as the prelude to the ideas and tools section, merely describing how rigorous we expect this to be
Make a correct government chapter and somehow split or merge the markets and rights chapter with the main rights chapter and wicked externalities
Principles
They only way out is through, we can't roll back industrialism, only reorient and redesign it
Democratic ownership and control. The only way to have any confidence new scaled or automated systems or civic systems are actually just is for all those concerned to have real power
The moral welfare motive instead of the profit motive


In rights chapter need to replace exclusion concept with rivalry
An ownership must necessarily deal with something rivalrous, since otherwise ownerships would collide



We can fix everything, a total plan to realize true democracy and prosperity, and solve the big problems of our age.

Many people are chipping away at our problems in isolation. Although they're doing good work, we think this strategy won't be successful for a few reasons:

- The problems are woven together, so the solutions can't work if they aren't as well.
- Different people take different approaches to the problems, and get in each other's way rather than pull in the same direction.
- It's difficult to get people excited or persuaded by a single solution to a single problem, not when they're aware of everything else that remains.






https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01FTE9HS2/
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B079HL9YSF/



# top of mind
We have to fix everything: my harebrained scheme to solve the big problems of our age with a new political party.
By forming a comprehensive and unified platform with which to improve our world, I feel we can actually make progress instead of chipping away in isolation.

This is an extremely rough broad sketch of what I have in my head. A lot of it isn't fully formed yet, and I'll be honest about how confident I am about any particular idea, and honest about my emotional state about them. I realize a lot of this is probably extremely naive, but it's burning a hole in my mind, and I would love some kind of reality check. Is there anything here? Am I completely off the mark?

Our collective problems are intertwined and urgent, and our isolated efforts to solve them don't seem to be working.
It seems that we have to first address our basic societal mechanisms, since those are the most foundational structures we use to achieve all other forms of coordination. We can't solve real problems if we don't have a way of efficiently making group decisions.
The gordian knot, hope, and confidence. My idea for a democratically run political party with an open source book at the center.

Here are the other things the organization could do:
member dues
quadratic funding pool
experiment with holistic administration and a harm-reducing constitution
democratic forum for ideas/posts/initiatives

We already commit to use violence to defend people's rights, but now we do so without a consistent and rigorous definition of what those rights are. Forming a provably consistent foundation would give us a strictly better situation than the one we're currently in.




<!--
TODO this is all having trouble. I'm trying to say that we have more in common than we think, and this project is about discovering the shared values and truths underpinning different philosophies that fight with each other. We know it's difficult to unify/distill everyone's beliefs like this

rather than saying "we agree to disagree", we embrace hegelian synthesis. even if people end up doing different things, the foundation they stand on that justifies their differences should be unified.
we want to know where the real lines are. does someone *really* disagree in a way that's fundamentally incompatible? if that's really the case, we're destined to be separate or

perhaps this is one of the places where I should simply give low confidence? just say "I hope this is possible, we're going to try and we'll see what happens"?

should this book use the word "I" for now?


I want to distill and unify. if groups have disagreements, one of a few things is possible:
- the disagreement is based on misunderstandings and unclear thinking, and there exists some clear philosophy that they would all agree to (the ideas in this book could likely unify libertarians and democratic socialists, whereas their current ideas put them at each others' throats)
- the disagreement is mostly superficial, resting on a shared philosophy, and the differences are perfect tolerable within the philosophy (different groups can have different cultures and ways of thinking about their societies, but a shared system gives them basically compatible values and mechanisms for resolving conflict that allow them to coexist)
- the disagreement is fundamental, and the groups cannot coexist. when this is the case, conflict is inevitable, and will continue until one of the groups is removed in some way, either by converting/subsuming the other, or annihilating it.

politics is largely the aggregated attempts to mediate or understand conflict, between individuals and between groups.




to achieve our goals, the book will attempt to answer a few crucial questions:

- how should rights work? can we discover a system of rights that philosophically/morally/mathematically sound? can we discover one that's provably optimal?
- how does that rights system impact how we should think about our governance structures? can we discover governance structures that provably optimally protect rights? what consequences does these rights/governance systems have on how we think about conflict/cooperation across cultures? how does it impact things like control of resources?







This is a huge goal that might not even be possible, we fully understand that. But we have confidence that our proposed philosophies and solutions are sound, and that a spirit of democratic cooperation and synthesis can take us the rest of the way. If you also care about these big problems, and want to help us figure out solutions and make them happen, please read on and get involved! We would love to hear what you think.




## Beliefs that determine our Ideas:
These determine the kinds of solutions we'll espouse.

**Every person has a unique and irreplaceable life experience of intrinsic moral worth.**

The consequences of this axiom are extremely important, and essentially form the philosophical foundation for democracy and equal rights. The book itself goes into much greater detail.

- Plurality. Every one of us has a perspective and an internal life that no one else can fully understand or access. This means everyone's desires are equally important.
- Compassion. Every one of us
- Democracy.
- Liberty. Every one of us should be free to make any choice we wish, only limited by how much our choices impact the choices of others.
- Prosperity. Every one of us should have equal share to the resources necessary to live a full and rich life, only limited by how much our share impacts the share of others. By increasing our shared ability to use and create resources, each of us becomes more economically free.

Some of these are in tension with one another, and navigating those tensions is a large part of our mission.


All our solutions can be graded on two scales: confidence (how confident are we that this solution is one that will move us in a good direction?), and tractability (how easy is this to realistically do right now?)
Any idea that we believe is both tractable and confident will get actual organized action to start attacking it. And our other efforts are spent trying to make ideas we're confident in more tractable, or gain confidence in other ideas.
First confidence, then action for tractability, then organized action.

-->


# The Book

since we're attacking such a complex tapestry of problems, our solutions aren't going to fall into neat categories. rather than having all our ideas categorized and ordered in sections such as "governance" or "economics", we instead merely order them according to the most intuitive order to encounter them. many of these ideas build on each other, and so they are presented in order of dependency. since complexity/dependency and tractability tend to go so hand in hand, the sections are also therefore roughly ordered by how immediately we can start applying the ideas, and then to have a "theory/application theory/application" pattern.

## the near future, what can we do right away?

## theories and mechanisms, what foundation are we building on? what tools can we use?

## cooperative economics, what institutions can we build without needing to change the government? applying theories and mechanisms to the "private" sphere.

## a new holistic constitution, applying theories and mechanisms to the "public" sphere.

## climate change, and a new human ecosystem, what we think the best path forward is and how the mechanisms can get us there.

## de-radicalizing the right: resisting fascism and unifying our culture



---


Perhaps the right way to frame this movement isn't to focus on the problems, but on creating a truly democratic world. Blog posts and things can detail how these ideas solve the big problems.


A truly democratic society, where the rights of all are complete and fully protected, and fairly balanced where they conflict.
That leads to a society where prosperity is enjoyed equally, while still providing incentive to do valuable work.


# We can fix everything, and we have no choice but to try.

As a global society, we're facing a lot of very serious and very difficult problems.

- **Government inefficiency and corruption.** Almost no government is truly representative and democratic, many are outright authoritarian, and basically all have serious problems with waste and graft. Good governance is a tricky problem, and we haven't solved it yet.

- **Police unaccountability and systemic injustice.** Crime and punishment in almost all societies is an expression of class power structures rather than the democratic will to defend everyone's rights.

- **Economic inequality, consumerism, corporatism.** Our economies are dominated by massive corporations, who instead of creating prosperity, derive much of their power from exploiting weaknesses in various systems, such as those in political institutions, human psychology, or markets that can be easily made into oligopolies.

- **Climate change, environmental destruction.** Erratic and severe weather patterns are already beginning to disrupt communities and create increased resource uncertainty and scarcity. We routinely destroy natural resources that both underpin our planet's economic value and are irreplaceably beautiful.

- **Misinformation, disinformation, surveillance capitalism.** It is now trivially easy for any group with spare resources to pollute our shared information ecosystem with misunderstandings or outright lies. The structure of attention capitalism rewards these kinds of behaviors and increasingly addicts us all to a world of shallow entertainment and consumerist indulgence.

- **Resurgence of fascism and authoritarianism.** The success of various social justice movements around the world and increased economic instability have empowered a new wave of fascist movements, and many governments have eagerly adopted technological methods of surveillance and control. Violent and irrational forms of market and social fundamentalism have been deeply inculcated into many populations.

These are serious problems! Each of them individually would be incredibly dangerous and destructive, and together they threaten to permanently destroy our species hopes of prosperity, dignity, and freedom.

It's also important to notice that each is interrelated to all the others. They reinforce and exacerbate one another, tying the whole collection into a paralyzing Gordian knot.

## So what should we do?

I routinely encounter young and idealistic people who simply throw up their hands when confronted with these big problems, and I can't help but sympathize. This is an unfair burden to be placed on any generation, and thinking of fixing it all is overwhelming.

<!-- The motivation here is that whenever I talk to idealistic people, they inevitably express despair and hopelessness, thinking that the problems we're facing are simply too massive and too intractable and too entangled for us to have any hope of making real progress.
But we think we have solutions that will work! And we're interested in getting feedback from everyone else to understand if we're actually right.
-->

But here's the thing: **we don't have any choice.** If we don't solve these problems, they will steadily dismantle our societies, and possibly even destroy us entirely.

We have the **obligation** of hope. If we don't (perhaps arrogantly) assume that we can figure it out, that we can overcome all these challenges and make a better world, then our failure is a foregone conclusion. We **have** to stare these hard realities in the face, and do the difficult work to find real solutions.

<!-- And we actually do believe that we can do it! Using the tools of mathematically balanced democratic mechanisms, cooperative economics, and holistic governance. We hope to persuade you that we're right. -->

## We're determined to discover and implement those solutions.

We believe that with rigorous philosophical, scientific, historical, cultural, and mathematical thinking, we can discover ways to organize our governments and social institutions that make them truly democratic, fair, efficient, and compassionate.

We don't just want to discover solutions in an ivory tower however. If our solutions are going to be moral and effective, they have to be deeply convincing and inspiring to a broad range of people, from many different cultures and viewpoints.

To do this, this project itself must be democratically controlled, and therefore committed to constant evolution and synthesis of different opinions. Only then can we hope to unify the efforts of all those already diligently working in areas such as democratic reform, justice reform, environmental justice, social justice, internet freedom, and anti-fascism. These efforts must be coordinated with each other if they're really going to be effective. The problems are woven together, the solutions must be too.

This book represents our best attempt to clearly state our shared beliefs and values, and discover a unified set of solutions to these big problems. We hope to then build a movement that can gradually and democratically improve the book, and coordinate the work necessary to implement the solutions.

<!--
- Unified and complete. This project is slowly working towards solutions in many problems in parallel, meaning that there's actually some hope of getting somewhere.
- Open source. By not predicating contribution to membership in an organization, we can coordinate very efficiently and accept useful contributions from anyone who's able to make them.
- Evergreen. Rather than publishing a timeline of more or less "one-off" articles or papers, this website is instead treated as a "living book", one that can be updated to reflect new understanding and problems.
-->

## This is a huge goal. How can we do it?

History is littered with movements with grand visions who were undermined by unrealistic expectations, insufficient resources, infighting, corruption, or sabotage by opponents. To give ourselves the best chance of success, we have to hold ourselves to high principles while at the same time not letting them bog us down and keep us from achieving our goals.

To do this, it helps to make a distinction between mission, principles, and values.

### Mission

<!--
Bring about a truly democratic world, where rights are protected for all, and abundant prosperity is enjoyed by all.
 -->


This is the long term goal we're trying to achieve. Our mission clarifies the work we care about versus what we consider a distraction.

**Find solutions, persuade the others, do the work.**

- **Find solutions.** We want to find solutions to our world's biggest and most important problems. The solutions we find have to be as close as we can manage to being perfectly correct. Doing this will require a lot of concerted effort, research, and experimentation.
- **Persuade the others.** We can't implement solutions alone, and we can't do so against everyone else's will. We have to be consistently persuasive and open. Our solutions must inspire confidence and action. They must be moral and inclusive.
- **Do the work.** It isn't enough to write papers. Real things have to change, from governments to companies to individuals, and we have to make that change happen.

### Principles

These are hard constraints that we expect to be adhered to in all circumstances. These are the source of our community's integrity.

- **Democracy.** No organization is truly open and inclusive if all its members aren't in control. All decision-making authority flows from members. Top leadership positions are selected democratically, and if a decision can be made democratically directly by members it should be.
- **Transparency.** Secrets are basically never necessary, and are poison to communities. If something effects others in any meaningful way, they should know about it. Only individual private matters should remain so.
- **Honesty.** Lies destroy trust and harm others. There is never any reason to lie or be misleading.
- **Humility.** We don't know everything, and never will. We must clearly state the limits of our knowledge.
- **Decency.** Everyone is expected to behave considerately, and treat all others with dignity and kindness.

We have a community code of conduct to enforce these principles.
https://www.rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct
https://github.com/stumpsyn/policies/blob/master/citizen_code_of_conduct.md

### Values

These are qualities we aspire to in our work, but that may sometimes conflict with each other or be imperfect. We are always trying to get better.

- Rigor. Honest people should consider our arguments to be empirically and logically unassailable. When we stand behind a claim, we should do so with the reinforcement of detailed, specific, corroborated evidence, or provably logical argument. We believe our ideas will be more successful and believable the closer they are to the real truth.

<!-- The only reasonable disagreement anyone could have with our positions is that they have a completely different worldview. -->

- Inclusivity. We believe rigor speaks for itself, and we do everything we can to clearly document what rigor looks like and how we measure it, as well as using repeatable automated tools. This means that anyone, from any background and with any education, can make just as valuable contributions as a recognized scholar. We also have collected resources to help people advance their skills and become a stronger member of our movement. Lists of useful learning materials, opportunities, and productivity/wellness advice are all available. This allows anyone to improve themselves and therefore their contributions.

- Persuasiveness. What we say should not merely be rigorously true, but must also successfully convince people who don't already agree. We should endeavor to make our arguments compelling and undeniable even to the most staunch detractor.

- Candor. We are compelled to speak the truth, even when it is difficult. Objectivity is for academics, and being rigorous isn't the same as being objective. We have specific beliefs, and we will clearly state them, and call out those in the world who act in ways we consider unacceptable. However we choose to attack the actions, not the person, and leave open the door for that person to do the right thing for the right reasons. We don't have to water down our beliefs to maintain the moral and civic high ground.

<!-- We respect those who speak candidly, even if we disagree with what they are saying. -->

- Synthesis. When we encounter new ideas that seem to contradict ours but could be compatible, we do our best to distill our understanding to include those new ideas. We hope to unify many different perspectives with philosophies and solutions that comfortably accommodate them all.

- Comprehensiveness. We hope to find a coordinated plan to solve all the biggest problems, so we try to be thorough. Everyone who identifies with our mission should find what they need to go forward. we want this to be a single place people can look to know how to help or what we should do. it should be complete enough to be adopted as a party platform. it should be navigable enough that people can find answers to their questions. in situations where someone else is doing the real useful work, we can simply point to them, but we should strive to either contain or point to all the aspects we think will be necessary to fix everything.

- Clarity. Say precisely what you mean as briefly as you can. Don't use unnecessarily academic or flowery language.

- Pragmatism. We want to make real changes in the real world, and we must be honest about what can realistically be achieved, by who, and on what timescale.

<!--
All our solutions can be graded on two scales: tractability (how easy is this to realistically do right now?), and confidence (how confident are we that this solution is one that will move us in a good direction?)
Any idea that we believe is both tractable and confident will get actual organized action to start attacking it. And our other efforts are spent trying to make ideas we're confident in more tractable, or gain confidence in other ideas.
First confidence, then action for tractability, then organized action.
-->

- Idealism. Things can get better! It's difficult to be hopeful sometimes, but we have the obligation to try.

<!-- https://oxide.computer/about/ -->

## Let's get this done together.

There are a few places you can go from here, depending on what you'd like to learn and how you'd like to help.

- The Book. This is an "evergreen" description of our beliefs and proposals.
- The Actions. Some of our ideas are ready to be implemented or tried, and the action area describes groups or institutions doing concrete work you could choose to join.
- The Blog. These are more "one-off" articles exploring our ideas in ways that are too narrow to be included in the book, such as reacting to current events. We do this mostly to give people entry points to understand our ideas and how they could make things better.
- The Codex. To support our resolution to be rigorous, we compile summaries and references of valuable works by different experts, such as books, papers, and documentaries. The codex summarizes these works, and describes how their conclusions relate to our goals.


<!-- Also, this is certainly a liberal project. However, I'm very interested in creating true consensus through creative problem-solving and effective persuasion. Also, I'm a former diehard libertarian who's now an anti-capitalist, but who still understands the inherent tension between collective goals and scarcity of resources. I want to find a way to synthesize market mechanisms with progressive ideals. However I genuinely believe that progressives, socialists, anarchists, moderate liberals, technocratic liberals, and libertarian minded conservatives can all fit in this movement. My goal is synthesis, not exclusion. The only group we simply have to commit to persuading is religious fundamentalists and other groups on the fascistic spectrum. -->

<!-- I genuinely believe part of the reason we haven't been able to form a powerful movement is because the existing ideas aren't convincing! If people look at an idea and say "that isn't really a good idea" or "that idea will never work", then they won't join a movement centered around that idea. Quality ideas have a stronger "gravitational pull", and are better capable of inspiring confidence

If you have an extremely difficult but rewarding goal, but your proposed strategy is lousy then no one will follow you, *even if attaining the rewards would be worth the effort*. People won't sign up to join a project they don't think is actually going to work.

filecoin and ipfs are doing better than other file storage systems because they're building on more convincing and more complete strategies. -->

<!-- I'm compensating for not being an expert in all the problem areas by making it open. It would be nice to have a one stop shop for people trying to figure out how to help to solve our urgent problems.
the gordian knot

The goal would be to go beyond what any individual author(s) could achieve with a traditional book, by allowing it to evolve and change and have many contributors, rather than be hemmed in by a publishing deadline. -->
