---
title: "Computable Legal Code"
---

Legal codes are typically written in natural language, which is necessarily vague and imprecise. This is problematic in many situations, since the law is meant to be a "code", instructions about governmental action that are intended to be as precise as is possible. Very often legal codes describe true "algorithms", step-by-step instructions intended to produce specific defined outcomes.

Computer programming languages in contrast are strictly structured, and any programming language text always has a single deterministic meaning. There would be many benefits if we could to make our legal codes more like computer languages, by making them deterministic, strictly structured, and computable, while at the same keeping them readable to non-experts.

An obvious potential objection to this idea is that the law cannot be fully deterministic since it must interact with the vague natural world and the inherently subjective phenomenological conclusions of human plaintiffs and investigators. This is of course true and unavoidable, but by understanding the separation between *code* and *data*, we can make our legal codes fully deterministic while still acknowledging the human messiness they must interact with.

# Description

Type theory is a branch of mathematics that is powerful and complete enough to encode all logical propositions, and it is the foundation of theoretical computer science and many modern automated proof assistants. By using a few type theoretical constructs, we can define our legal codes with complete precision.

In computer languages code is merely a set of instructions, and data is the information that is input or output from those instructions. For example, let's say we're defining a function that takes as input any two numbers, adds them together, and returns that addition as the result. The actual program text that will define such a function will depend entirely on the exact grammar of the programming language, but let's pretend some language exists that makes the text look like this:

```
define function add:
  accept input "x" which is a number
  accept input "y" which is a number
  return result (x + y)
```

Real computer languages are often much less verbose. Here's the same function in a common language called `python`:

```python
def add(x: number, y: number):
  return x + y
```

The importance of the separation between code and data is this: the messy human findings and decisions and conclusions of humans can be modeled as data, and the laws themselves can be code that accepts data inputs and gives data outputs.

Let's use a silly fictional example to make this idea clear. Say we're writing the laws regarding zoning, and deciding what kinds of zoning exceptions can be made for different kinds of construction. We want to allow these kinds of exceptions:

- Charitable organizations can build anything they want.
- For-profit organizations can be given an exception if an auditor approves it.
- For-profit organizations can be given an exception if an auditor doesn't approve it but they pay an increased tax per month.
- Construction performed before a certain date is "grandfathered in".

The zoning exception law is then a function that takes as input what kind of organization owns the property, when the construction will be performed, the decisions of auditors, and outputs some conclusion about whether the exception application will be denied or accepted with some modifications. Let's pretend there's some language where this is the program text that makes zoning application decisions:

```
define type Organization, which is one of:
  Charitable
  or ForProfit

define type YesOrNo, which is one of:
  Yes
  or No

define type Date, which has properties:
  year, which is a number
  month, which is a number
  day, which is a number

define constant grandfather_cutoff_date to be a Date
  assigning property year to 2020, month to 1, and day to 1

define type ZoningExceptionApplication, which has properties:
  organization, which is an Organization
  construction_date, which is a Date
  has_auditor_approval, which is a YesOrNo


define type ZoningExceptionDecision, which is one of:
  Rejection
  or GrandfatherApproval, which has properties:
    construction_date, which is less than grandfather_cutoff_date
  or CharitableApproval, which has properties:
    organization, which has value Charitable
  or ForProfitAuditorApproval
  or ForProfitMustPayTax

define function decide_ZoningExceptionApplication:
  accept input application, which is a ZoningExceptionApplication

  if property organization of application has value Charitable
    then return result CharitableApproval
      assigning property organization to organization

  if property construction_date of application is less than grandfather_cutoff_date
    then return result GrandfatherApproval
      assigning property construction_date to construction_date

  if property has_auditor_approval of application has value Yes
    then return result ForProfitAuditorApproval

  else return result ForProfitMustPayTax
```

Of course I've just made up this little language, but it is absolutely possible to create a language to fulfill these requirements.

<!-- it would be really cool to have a "(s: Signer) -> Signature<s, T>" type, representing a type that has been proven to be a cryptographic signature of the particular individual signer -->

# Benefits

- Computable legal code gives us the ability to prove arbitrary logical qualities about our laws and legal procedures, such as their consistency with some ethical framework, or that they are provably secure or fair.
- Computable legal code gives us the ability to extract running computer code to use in systems such as government databases and voting machines.
- Computable legal code makes the law more searchable, since a stricter structure allows search algorithms to more easily understand information.
- Since the law is computable, it doesn't matter if people don't find the default representation understandable. Anyone can create a program to convert the one syntax representation of the code into any other representation, translating it into any form some group may find easier to understand.
- Our legal system would benefit by gaining the powers of all programming languages, such as allowing easy reuse of legal definitions in different parts of the law, easy sharing between groups, and automatic checks that it is sound and addresses all possible conditions.

# Potential Objections

- Designing and implementing *any* programming language is a difficult task, and this is no exception.
- Converting existing legal systems to use a language like this would require a lot of work.
- Such a technological solution to a traditionally very analog problem would likely seem foreign and meet resistance from the legal profession and many citizens.
- We already rely on a class of legal experts to write and adjudicate our laws, and this would shift the nature of that expertise rather than removing it's necessity. The argument can be made that since this would give the law such predictable structure that it would be easier to learn, but it would still require effort.

# Open Questions

The technical aspects of this idea are well understood by theoretical computer scientists, and there is no doubt in my mind that a language like this could be constructed. The more interesting question is whether it would actually improve governance and clarity of the law.

I intend to design such a legal programming language at some point in the future, and to use it as much as possible in governing private organizations such as cooperatives, companies, and political groups. Only by using such a language with real people can we find the social flaws in the design.



governance engineers
