This section is about general purpose theories and tools. It's essentially laying the technical groundwork for the more applied sections later on.


humble modernism (or perhaps a name that isn't so referential is better? compassionate rigor? humble ambition?)
engineers have to be careful to be humble, the act of engineering, of bending the world around you to your will, is inherently intoxicating, and it can fill you with a dangerous self-important arrogance about what you can and should do in the world
I wanted to call it new modernism, but we might as well emphasize the humility right?
what distinguishes this thinking from previous modernism is that the young people espousing this version have at least become aware of their privelige, and are operating from a perspective of inclusion and legitimate cooperation
modernism emphasized mathematics, logic, science, engineering, and largely ignored the humanities and the arts. old modernism was very white and male and rich, and ignored the wishes and concerns of others. for me one of the main tenets of my personal modernism is understanding the logic of cooperation itself! that's part of what has energized me to believe things can change, that we've stumbled across a better mathematical understanding of how to cooperate.
humble modernism is grounded in the core values of compassion, inclusion, and democracy (these are what make it "humble"). but it attempts to pursue those values through the rigorous application of logic, mathematics, science, engineering, and technology.
this is a good place to talk about the "cart-horse-driver" metaphor. the cart part has always been a little clunky so I'll deemphasize it here, but the "horse-driver" part is perfectly apt. humble modernism recognizes that the arts/humanities are the driver, they tell us what to even pursue, but the rigorous disciplines are almost always what will actually get us there
facts don't care about your feelings is certainly true, despite the obliviousness of the douchebag logic bros who always say it. but the critical correlary is that facts only matter because of our feelings.

> ... a socially progressive trend of thought that affirms the power of human beings to create, improve and reshape their environment with the aid of practical experimentation, scientific knowledge, or technology. From this perspective, modernism encouraged the re-examination of every aspect of existence, from commerce to philosophy, with the goal of finding that which was 'holding back' progress, and replacing it with new ways of reaching the same end.
