# An Introduction to Voting Theory, and Hope that We Can Fix Everything

here's what we generally use today, it's called plurality voting, and it sucks
it only makes sense when choosing between only two candidates, and if there are more really obvious problems like vote splitting start to happen
I genuinely believe plurality voting is the core reason why our society is so broken. it structurally enforces a two party system, which inherently incentivizes polarization and extremism, which creates an environment where political activism and news media will always tend to be irrational

approval voting is a better alternative, it solves all these problems
it chooses candidates who are approved by the most people (duh!), so they tend to be safe consensus candidates
we definitely shouldn't use ranked choice! here's a separate talk/essay about that

however as great as approval is, it still has some problems
imagine a situation where most people casually prefer some option, but a relatively small group deeply dislike that option. in an approval election they're certainly better off than a plurality election, but I think we can all agree that option probably shouldn't be chosen

that's where resource voting systems come in. they allow you to use some finite number of votes to give more support to some options than others. this means you can put more votes on things you care more about. problems like the one above go away in these situations, since if the majority only casually prefers some option, they probably won't put many votes on that option and so the deeply concerned minority will win.

quadratic voting is a specific version of resource voting, and it's actually been mathematically proven to be optimal. the proof is complex, check out this post to understand it better

however even a resource voting system has problems, which mostly come down to the concept of "spending" the votes. that's where persistent democracy, the core idea of this book, comes in
