# Persistent Democracy

> This post is just intuitively introduces the concept of Persistent Democracy and its applications. If you're interested in a more rigorous definition and defense of the idea, please check out [the theory section](TODO theories).
> This post is a work-in-progress draft of a chapter in the next version of the Hopeful Pathway book.

The purpose of Persistent Democracy is to create a system of group decision making that is the most expressive, flexible, and accurate it could possibly be. To do this, Persistent Democracy uses one core idea: every person in a cooperative group has some arbitrary number of "decision weights" they use for voting:

- Each person can move their weights around at any time, rather than having to wait for an election event to come and go.
- Each person can move around different amounts of these weights to effect the outcome of different decisions, so they can put more on decisions they care more about.
- Weights can be used as a negative vote, meaning you can vote *against* something.
- Weights are "moved" rather than "spent", so using weights to influence decisions doesn't change how many weights you have.
- The exact number of weights each person has doesn't matter, since weights can be split up by placing a decimal quantity such as `0.5` on a decision.
- In an equal democracy, each person has the same number of weights and so has the same amount of decision power. It might make sense for private organizations to use structures where different members have different numbers of weights.

The basic idea of giving each person a number of decision weights that can be moved around at any time is the only assumption of Persistent Democracy.

However, there are many different ways for these weights to actually *effect* decisions, and different ways are better for making different kinds of decisions! We could design any system to use weights to make any kind of decision, but there are two important ones we want to talk about now:

- Persistent Voting for making decisions that are reversible.
- Persistent Commitments for making decisions that require some sacrifice and so aren't reversible.

## Persistent Voting

There are many decisions we would call "reversible", meaning we can change our minds and make a different decision at any time. Basically all our elections for public servants such as mayors, police chiefs, sanitation commissioners, etc, are all reversible decisions. These people are just employees of our shared governance bodies, and in the same way we allow private companies to replace their employees at basically any time, we should be able to replace our public servants at any time. Persistent Voting just changes a decision to be ongoing rather than happening in a single irreversible event, so we still have to choose some "inner" voting method that's used to actually add up votes. Possible options include pure [Quadratic Voting](TODO), some variant of it like [Quadratic Range Voting](TODO), or any other voting method that takes different amounts of weights into account.

However it would be inefficient and chaotic to allow changes to be made *too* quickly (it wouldn't be great for the mayor to change four times in a hour). So we should design some stabilization method that keeps the current winner from switching too quickly. You can find the precise details of the stabilization method we've designed in [the theory section](TODO), but generally we've taken some inspiration from [Conviction Voting](TODO) to design a method that follows these principles:

- If a new candidate pulls ahead of the current winner, they begin to fill up some "stabilization bucket". If they fill up the entire bucket they become the new current winner of the position.
- If the new candidate has a bigger vote advantage they fill up the stabilization bucket faster.
- If the new candidate loses their vote advantage, the stabilization bucket begins to drain based on the size of the new gap.

We'll talk about how the size of these stabilization buckets is determined in a later section. In general we want more important decisions that effect more people to have bigger stabilization buckets and therefore need more weight to change.

It also wouldn't be great for the vote differences to be published instantly, since it would be annoying and stressful for people to worry about what vote changes might be happening at all different hours. For this reason we should choose some sort of "update rhythm", basically the times and days where the current state of all votes is actually tabulated and published. This would allow each member to only worry about their votes at most one time in every update cycle.

<!-- - Update Time, the rhythm of time in which vote changes are actually published and take effect. So for example if the Vote Cycle is for votes to be updated every day at 12:00 UTC, then a voter could change their vote four times in a day before that time and only the final state would actually have an effect on elections. This cycle would exist just to encourage
- Change Time, the rhythm of time in which actual position changes are made. So for example if the Change Time is every Monday at 7:00 UTC, then that's when any new winners actually take over their positions.

- If *multiple* new candidates overtake the current winner, they each fill up their own stabilization bucket individually, and whichever of them fills theirs up first becomes the new winner.

True ties are handled by no one occupying the position! Votes can be changed very quickly though, so true ties should very rarely last long. -->

Persistent voting is exciting because it allows true direct democracy to be efficient and stable. Since voters can change their vote in any election at any time, they can participate in only the decisions they're actually concerned about while leaving other decisions for other voters. Many more decisions could be made democratically without overwhelming everyone.

It even allows "auto-pilot democracy", where low voter turnout is essentially a nonissue. If some concerned minority makes most of the electoral choices, and everyone else is perfectly fine with those choices, then the majority can just not participate without worry. If the concerned minority begins making harmful or foolish choices, the rest of society can quickly override them before harm is done.

Persistent voting can even be used to select *documents*, such as constitutions, tax codes, legal definitions, or anything else. These elections work the same way as those for officials, where voters nominate documents to add them to the election and whichever document has the current greatest amount of support is the one that's in effect.

We [theorize](TODO) that persistent voting will have many massive benefits:

- Allows groups to more quickly discover new options and converge toward decisions that are better for everyone.
- Removes regretful strategic voting or "election hangovers", since negative surprises can just be counteracted before they do harm.
- Positive surprises are also much more possible, since their possibility can be detected and reinforced more easily.
- Makes it way more expensive to "buy" an election with media blitzes or fake stories.
- Elections would be less sensitive to noise, politicking, campaigning, and predictions about the outcome.
- Would allow more complex voting methods, since voters have unlimited time to think about and understand how they wish to vote.

## Persistent Commitments

Not all decisions are reversible! Many of the most consequential decisions we make, such as all those that spend resources, are irreversible.

Persistent Democracy can still be used to make irreversible decisions, it just has to do so more carefully. The whole point of persistent voting is that it removes election deadlines, which are dangerous because they create sensitive "strategic windows" where bad actors can stir up noise and skew results. With true commitments we can't avoid some sort of deadlines, but we can mitigate them by leaning all the way into the principles of [conviction voting](TODO). Here's how a persistent commitment works, visit the [theory page](TODO) for the exact details:

- Each commitment has a deadline. Some commitments are cyclical such as those for budget periods, but other commitments might only happen once.
- During the voting period before the deadline, voters can move around their weights to nominate and vote for "decision documents" that say what should be done in the commitment. For example a budget commitment would choose the budget document.
- However instead of using stabilization buckets and a current winner as is done in persistent voting, particular choices instead *accumulate* votes as the deadline approaches.
- If a voter has kept some weights on the same option for longer then their weights are stronger.
- If a voter removes weights from an option, the weight moves slowly from the old to the new instead of happening immediately.
- When the deadline hits, whichever option is the winner is chosen.

This process is designed to reward durable and consistent voting, and to prevent weird strategic swings or surprises right before the deadline. Since commitments have to be made more carefully we want to err on the side of choices that are better understood, even possibly choosing to "do nothing"!

In most types of commitments, options only accumulate weight *during* the cycle itself. But in cycles like those used in [persistent funding](TODO), options can accumulate weight over their entire life until they're chosen and funded.

<!--
Each commitment would have some deadline for the electorate to choose some "decision document". Each commitment should have a default document that is considered the "winner", and any new document must overtake that document using stabilization buckets in order to be implemented. This default document would be decided by whatever election defined the existence of this commitment. This default document could very easily be "do nothing".
wait blaine, what size stabilization bucket would this default document have? maybe these should just be normal conviction voting cycles, and people have to actually endorse the default document?

If a persistent voting style change could possibly require an outlay of resource from something like a budget, then perhaps that means we should make the change time equivalent to the time necessary to put that outlay together? And possibly even require with dependent types that if such a change happens the next budget must include an item for this change?

The thing I think we have to remember is that we're just trusting democracy! People will bring up any truly concerning problems if they're at all possibly predictable. It's unwise of us to think we can predict everything this system might have to account for. That's why we're enabling it to be changed by voters!
-->

## Constitutional Persistent Democracy

Any cooperative group has some "constitution" that defines at the very top level what their rules are. Sometimes these consitutions aren't actually written down but just implied by culture and norms, but cooperation is [more transaparent and therefore more fair](https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/contra-weyl-on-technocracy) when the rules are clearly written down, so we think we should use constitutions.

The beauty of using persistent voting to select constitutions is that a cooperative group can structure their rules in any way they feel is convenient and useful, and then change them as soon as they want to. If a cooperative group feels they'd rather make fewer directly democratic decisions but instead delegate to elected officials, they can do that. If they realize they'd rather make certain decisions directly but delegate others, they can do that.

If these constitutions are written in a [computable governance code](TODO), then the constitutional document can even be used to automatically generate voting software or institutional servers. Doing this would be especially useful in private organizations or decentralized networks.

Interestingly, groups could choose to create portions of their constitution *that can't be changed*. We call these portions "constitutional kernels", and they essentially make it impossible to change those rules without throwing away the existing system and creating a new one. In general we think they're probably a bad idea for governments, they might make sense for certain kinds of private organizations.

Let's also ask this question: if you have a constitution selected with persistent voting, should it be possible to change *the fact that the constitution is selected with persistent voting*? A decision that changes how changes are made is irreversible in a way, since the new decision method might not allow you to go back to what you had before. A constitution could place this very top level rule in a "commitment kernel", a portion of the document that can only be changed using a persistent commitment rather than at any time. Again, visit [the theory page](TODO) if you're interested in the fine details of questions like this.

<!--
This is an interesting question to consider: *should* we design constitutions with kernels? I'm still not sure about all the ramifications of this idea, but there are some things to consider:

- If a group is *certain* they'll never want to change some aspect of their governance, perhaps because they've found a logical proof the aspect is perfect or optimal in some way, then it can make sense.
- If a group is essentially encoding their non-negotiable values into the kernel.
- If a group isn't very high stakes or  and they don't want to get bogged down with certain kinds of decisions.
- If a group is just experimenting with kernels.

of course another thing to consider is *how difficult* it is to change the rules of change. you could design a constitution that made it so difficult to change certain aspects that those aspects were *effectively* in the kernel. This honestly seems like a good way to design most constitutions. Make it *possible* to change everything, but make some aspects so difficult to change that any proposed change would basically have to be universally agreed upon before it could happen.
-->

Constitutions can contain other constitutions much in the way nesting dolls contain other nesting dolls. You can write a constitution that allows "sub-constitutions" to be created underneath it for more specific areas of decision making. Upper constitutions can limit the power of sub-constitutions, such as to enforce rights or limit jurisdiction. This fits really nicely with things like federated administration, since every level can divide up the area underneath it to delegate responsibility.

This nesting gives us a natural way to decide how big things like stabilization buckets should be. Decisions that effect more people should have larger stabilization buckets and so be more difficult to change. Oppositely, if a constitution allows more directly democratic decisions, then each individual decision should have a smaller stabilization bucket and so be easier to change, since the group is deciding that each person is effectively delegating more decisions to other people.

These rules lead to very intuitively reasonable situation, visit [the theory page](TODO) for more details:

- Decisions such as a top level constitution effect more people and are the only decision at their level, so they're more difficult to change.
- Lower level decisions involve fewer people and have more "sibling" decisions at their same level, to they're easier to change.

<!--
Consider the situation where some group is in perfect agreement about wanting to change their highest level document, and in perfect agreement about which document they want to replace it with. If they want to do this, we can assume for simplicity's sake that the sub-decisions the current document defines aren't the right ones. If they thought this, each person would place all of their weights on the same new document, and this situation is clearly the one that should happen the fastest possible, since the entire group is in perfect agreement. This number defines the size of the stabilization bucket! The size should be amount of accrued vote as if every member of the group was in perfect agreement. This means we've defined stabilization as a sort of "time-based delegation".

Then at lower levels where there are more decisions to make, we should divide the size of the stabilization buckets by the number of decisions, meaning that each decision can be made with less consensus.
It's unclear if the number of decisions should include all *higher* decisions or only the ones that the current level.
We want higher up decisions to only be diluted by even higher decisions rather than lower decisions.

If the layers divide up the electorate into smaller groups, then that nicely handles resizing the importance of decisions made by those smaller groups.

We can put these three things together to decide the size of stabilization buckets. If all the members of a group were in perfect agreement with each other on all issues at some layer of governance, only cared about that layer of governance, and cared about each decision at that layer equally, then they would divide their weights equally to select a single candidate in each decision at that layer. Since those candidates would be perfectly agreed upon, each should be made the winner as fast as possible
-->

These constitutions would define what decisions are made with persistent voting or commitments or any other method. Visit [the page about miscellaneous methods](TODO) if you want more ideas for ways persistent weights could be used.

<!-- prioritizing finite resources, prioritizing project funding, offsetting taxes, asserting ownership, or endorsing people for public service. -->

## Comparison with Liquid Democracy

Both persistent and liquid democracy are really trying to achieve the same thing. Both want to make direct democracy possible by making it possible in principle for every person to effect every group decision. [Liquid democracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_democracy) does this by allowing voters to delegate their votes to some other person, who can then delegate them again, and so on.

We feel this system doesn't offer any unique benefits that aren't also enjoyed by persistent democracy, and could fall victim to a pretty nasty problem: "lazy demagoguery". Liquid democracy would make it easy for a voter to just delegate huge amounts of their votes to someone they shallowly like such as a media personality, and never bother to check on what those votes are being used for. Those kinds of concentrations of voting power would be a problematic vulnerability. They're also totally avoidable!

Persistent democracy just as powerfully supports delegation as liquid democracy, but in a simpler way: "delegation by abstention". If you don't care about an issue, just don't vote on it and allow others to make the decision! You can always change your mind and move your weights around, and the exact stabilization bucket system is designed to make more important decisions take longer to change, giving you more time to notice them if they're important.

No system can ever change the fact that people will listen to others and be swayed by their opinions, so no matter what there will be some amount of "delegation by persuasion". It's unnecessary to directly encode delegation into the system itself when we can just allow natural delegation in a simpler design. We ought to require that a voter actually changes their votes themselves, whatever that means in a particular system.
