# Economic Activism, and the Path To a Global Persistently Democratic Mega Cooperative

there's an inherently adversarial relationship between the capital investors in a business and their customers. you know what I'm talking about, because you feel this tug of war every time you are trying to deal with a for-profit entity. you're trying to maximize the amount you can get from them by getting more for your money, and they're trying to get more of your money for doing as little as they can for you.

this adversarial relationship shows itself in many ways. since a for-profit entity has no reason to be concerned about your real welfare, only your buying decisions, they have to be legally forced not to lie to you, to harm you against your will, to take advantage of your weaknesses. We've seen this in many ways. companies find our psychological weak points, our lowest instincts and fears, and use them against us. they weaponize advertising to scare us with far away dangers or the fear that other people are more powerful or desirable than we are. they convince us to buy things that don't actually make us happy because we're avoiding the fear, uncertainty, and doubt they intentionally planted in our minds. and of course profit seeking has no concern with our shared surroundings, our air, our water, our forests and mountains, our culture and politics.

usually the only way we can think of to control these profit seeking entities is to use our governments. but we routinely find that we don't have enough control over our governments, and since these profit seeking entities have slowly taken control of such a massive majority of the useful land and resources and capital, they're able to exert almost perfect control over the institutions we created to serve all of us.

there's a surprisingly simple solution to this problem. why don't we just cut out the middleman? why assume that we need these profit seeking companies to run our economy and provide the things we all need, when we can just provide the things we need ourselves?

member cooperatives are private institutions that are democratically owned and controlled by their members, normal customers who have created the institution just because they want it to exist. Credit unions are the classic example, they're banks that are owned by their account holders, simply because the account holders require the services of a bank, and don't want to constantly fight with a profit-seeking bank.

cooperatives are an extremely powerful model that combines the best aspects of non-profit charities and for-profit companies

two institutions that offer the same services but are different in that one is owned by profit seeking investors and the other cooperatively by customers, the cooperative will always have a structural competitive advantage since all profits will always be reinvested in improved quality or lower prices. however this will only be true if the cooperative is managed correctly! luckily a cooperative that's already self-sustaining and a large mature institution can use the exact same *internal* incentive systems that for-profit companies use, so there's no reason why cooperatives can't be managed just as well as any other institution.

given all this, you're probably wondering why member cooperatives aren't the dominant model in the entire economy. partially they are! in many countries cooperative banks have the majority of market share.

however there are a few reasons why this isn't true in basically every industry and every country. and of course there are some pockets of the economy that probably wouldn't function best as cooperatives, [read this post about the future economy we imagine](TODO)
<!-- cooperative management and maintenance alongside for-profit crowdsell innovation. an individual laborer can never have the same duplicable leverage as a knowledge worker or owner. however ownership and management is best deployed cooperatively, so the only thing left for true profit-seeking is knowledge work, the place where real innovation leverage occurs -->

obviously the problem of ineffective democratic systems which made it too difficult for members to exert control and demand their cooperatives fight harder on their behalf. persistent democracy is a clean solution to that problem, and we can experiment with ever better systems.
capital investment problem and how that's just a distorted power imbalance
systemic suppression by inefficient laws

so we need to be clever and ruthless. if the laws set aside for cooperatives are nothing more than a playpen meant to control our efforts, then we'll ignore the playpen and fight the corporations on their own terms. if the law privileges the formation of for-profit companies, then we'll make a company that's for-profit in name only, and just enshrine our cooperative values in its articles of incorporation and bylaws.

it's time for us to realize something important. in order to have any real hope of reforming our societies, we have to regain our *economic* power. we have to engage in *economic* activism, using democratic structures to retake enough land, resources, and capital that we can stand head to head with the existing corporate behemoths and then change our laws to take away the unfair advantages those corporate behemoths used to gain their position.
corporatism has used unfair laws to steal the power of logic, science, technology, and industrial scale away from us. many think those things are inherently dangerous or corrosive, but that's not true. science and scale aren't the problem, corporate ownership and control is the problem. if we democratically use those powerful tools then we can point them towards shared prosperity and real human flourishing instead of short-sighted extraction.
we have to stop waiting for our government to be reformed to start changing things. building our own private organization is something we don't have to ask permission for, and no one can stop us without stopping all the other private organizations as well.

<!-- our cooperative constitutions should disallow dissolving, selling, or demutualizing the entity. the constitutional kernel should enshrine persistent democracy irrevocably, so the only way for this organization to die is for it to lose all its members -->


I'm looking for help. I'm especially looking for:

- A legal engineer. I don't use the word lawyer because I don't want someone who thinks the law is immutable or unnavigable. I don't want someone who'll say *if* something can be done, I want someone who'll figure out *how* it can be done. There are many tricky aspects to navigating the law, and I need someone sharp and determined who can lead the fight in hacking through the jungle.
- A designer. someone with keen sense of style who knows how to make things beautiful. no particular specialties are required, but you have to be able to learn and adapt and apply your eye to different domains quickly

I'm looking for awesome people, people who learn fast, have passion for this work, who have a track record of doing things they aren't required to do, and who are true believers in democracy and shared prosperity.

And I'll build the technology.

I'm not sure what to build first! It would be nice to start with something that people are already willing to pay for, something where early adopters are already present, something that either hasn't been built already or the existing for-profit versions don't have real moats (social media seems like it has moats, but honestly the services have all become so poisonous that the moat is meaningless at this point)





in this chapter, you basically need to tell people what cooperatives are, why they're better, why they can outcompete private companies if they're managed well, why I think they haven't done so yet (they've been systemically supressed, their democratic systems haven't been effective).

then talk about how they can't raise capital from profit seeking investors in quite the same way, but that wouldn't actually be a disadvantage if the largest concentrations of investment capital were democratically controlled either as coops or through the government. if more capital was being invested with the intent to produce more general social and economic public goods gains than was being invested to produce private profits, then the public good benefits of cooperatives would let them outcompete for-profit companies even for capital
cooperatives remove the misalignment between investors and consumers, since they're the same group. profit-seeking investors are willing to give money to for-profit companies because they promise to use that money to benefit those investors. by the same logic, consumers should be willing to give money to a cooperative because it promises to use that money to benefit them. if it's true that investors are better able to fund organizations that are adversarially bad for consumers than consumers are able to fund organizations that are holistically good for them (but adversarially bad for investors since they miss profit opportunities) doesn't represent some inherent structural weakness in cooperatives, but merely a capital power imbalance between investors and consumers. this power imbalance also itself wasn't created by some reasonable inherent economic law, but by our modern systems of rights all unfairly privileging current property owners and profit-seeking interests over all other social interests.

when you think about it, a democratic government is just a cooperative, one where membership is determined by being a taxable citizen and the shared goods being produced are things like a system of rights and justice, common beneficial institutions and services, land based infrastructure, etc.





Corporatism and consumerism have been obvious disasters for society. There's a clear adversarial relationship between capital investors and both workers and customers. We'll talk about the relationship between workers and customers, but for now let's simplify things and just talk about investors and customers.

There's a pretty obvious solution to this problem, member cooperatives

However there's a reason they haven't taken off.

Here's how persistent democracy can be the foundation of a radically different cooperative.

I'm starting such an institution. Once something like this gets off the ground and is self-sustaining and growing it can operate like any normal company, but of course acting on the wishes of members rather than investors.

We have an opportunity to create a new kind of cooperative. It doesn't seem to me like cooperatives are aggressive enough about expanding to further serve their members. I want to create an *activist* cooperative, one with the explicit mission of attacking corporatism and consumerism in all its forms and comprehensively improving its members lives by expanding into ever more sectors of the economy.
I want this cooperative to have startup energy. At first we'll follow the lead of companies like [oxide computer](TODO) by paying all our employees the same amount including me, since I just want a high energy team to build reusable organizational tools
I honestly don't know what the first thing should be though! we need a first service that is amenable to a cooperative structure, is relatively small so we can get it off the ground with a small team, and that early adopters are excited to pay for in order to control it democratically
honestly a potentially great first thing is a purely digital credit union
there are many annoying legal questions to answer. if the laws about cooperatives made sense we'd just make a single organization and be done with it. but we might have to do something tricky, like have a separate research and development company that's paid by a credit union, and R&D company is chartered to be governed by the wishes of members in the credit union?
a digital credit union seems like a perfect first thing, since its already proven it can work, and its a financial institution meaning we can gain knowledge about the financial system and use that position as leverage in efforts to fund other parts of the business

I want to bring some startup energy to cooperatives! I want to be intense and determined and monomaniacally focused on achieving these goals. I don't want to work with people who just want a chill job where it's fun to hang out with your coworkers. if you haven't noticed, I'm exactly the opposite of chill! I'm super intense!
I don't know how to do any of these things (fundraising, operations management, financial modeling, market research, design), but I do know how to build all levels of a robust web application, and a fair amount about formal verification.

you can't achieve a huge goal all in one step, it's impossible. you need to build structures and then teams capable of sustainably marching through many small milestones. you need to start with something that can sustain itself long enough to find a foothold.
that's what this strategy is all about. it's about creating the seed institutions, structured using these uniquely powerful democratic systems and founded with a cultural commitment to aggressively pursuing our shared goals rather than settling into a comfortable rhythm. it's about growing these institutional seeds to expand to more and more parts of our society and economy, solving more problems and unraveling as much exploitation, extraction, environmental destruction, waste, and greed as we possibly can.

I'm done asking for permission, but I am asking for help. if you have money, time, knowledge, or skills to give to this mission, please reach out to me. I'm looking for amazing people to plant seeds that can grow into a worldwide transformation of our economy and society.







https://www.netinterest.co/p/from-co-ops-to-daos-a12








In the capitalist imagination, promising a financial return is supposed to turn on rigorous thinking and skin in the game style incentives. It seems in reality it more often turns off thinking entirely and unleashes wishful striving

Blockchains aren't going to break apart the walled gardens, but cooperatives could





your reputation/voice should be harmed if you bump something that ends up being divisive or noisy or untrue, even if you didn't realize. rewarding rigor and caution is the whole point. if you aren't *sure* about something, you shouldn't support it.














economic activism, fixing our economy without first waiting for legal permission, member cooperatives and the labor/capital divide

cooperatives as an institutionalized form of mutual aid

power comes from getting things done. solving problems and improving people's welfare
capitalist culture lies about doing that in many ways, since it is inherently adversarial.



we don't need profit-seekers as much as we think we do
member cooperatives shift profit-seeking away from the supply side in the form of a monetary margin, and toward demand side in the form of increased consumer surplus.
with the member cooperative model in hand, only "uncertain" economic domains really make sense as the realm of profit-seekers. the very first portion of economic progress, the part that involves charting completely new and entirely unknown territory, need be left to them. everything after that, all the relatively boring management, can be left to member cooperatives.
We don't need *de*-regulation, we need *democratic* regulation. if regulation is *actually* democratic, and rooted in consistently defensible frameworks of rights, then it will be efficient in regards to *social* welfare, which is more important than being efficient in regards to growth or wealth.
Member cooperatives are the model that can make a world with less regulation sane, since the business itself is owned by its customers there isn't as much need for the government to protect them.






it should be obvious that any improvements we can make to our society without having to change the government we should attempt to make. we don't have to get anyone's permission, and we don't have to wait around for everyone to agree with us. we can build a lot of civic power and get a lot done.
but we have to watch out: we can't just fall back on profit-seeking, and not just build new systems of extraction and inequality.
and of course, private action isn't going to be enough, we'll have to tackle the government at some point.
in this section, we include discussions of the internet and robust software.

- member cooperatives as a way to take back economic power from capitalists, be a perfect synthesis of markets and cooperation, and slowly build societal competence for democratic cooperation and institutions, allowing us to in the limit have a post-scarcity society where jointly owned assets form the basis of an incredibly solid standard of living floor.
  it seems cooperation is *always* more efficient than competition when the costs of cooperation are outweighed, and the costs are lower than people think. if you can form a company to cooperate on some task, then *inherently* that cooperation is worth it. why should that company compete with others? ironically, capitalists have always understood this, which is why monopolistic mergers, oligopoly, regulatory capture, and other forms of capitalist collusion have existed for such a long time. (capitalists don't just have their interests aligned by more obviously "rational" material concerns, but also by cultural and idealogical ones. capitalists *believe* that their class is superior, and they share an emotional dislike of the labor class. that aligns them to collude just as much as the profit motive, since they identify each other as members of an ingroup). a method of "componentized generalization" can always be more efficient than pure duplicative competition (and when it's controlled democratically and therefore non-antagonistic the consolidation isn't a problem), since even if two groups are working towards slightly different final goals, finding the components of their systems that can be generalized to serve all compatible needs and then used flexibly to achieve the incompatible needs can always in theory be more efficient.
  the principle of competition in markets isn't really about efficiency, it's about non-coercion. the presence (or theoretical presence) of competition implies non-coercion.
  the other thing about markets that makes them powerful is that seemingly by definition they include mechanisms that are dynamically self-balancing. an equilibrium is always maintained.
  non-coercion and dynamic equilibrium are the actual things that make markets what they are. market fundamentalists incorrectly subsume the profit motive into the virtues of markets, creating the greed is good mindset, but they haven't considered that a group's desire to prosper and cooperate is itself a form of "profit". By conflating incentive (which can come from innumerable sources) with the profit-motive they've formed a blindly narrow idea of how our economy can work.

- co-housing as a way to both increase the efficiency and utility and abundance of housing and all domestic utility in general (enabled financially by the democratically owned cooperative credit unions above), as well as increase social cohesion, heal social wounds, decrease loneliness, and give everyone the *option* of joining and thriving in a tribe.

- "nomad mortgages" and frictionless property sales, allowing people to move around while still building equity and wealth.

(If I was to come up with a comprehensive economic theory, it would probably be called Cooperative Economics or something)

- creating a fully logical assembly language that enables us to create technology that is truly robust enough to be used for these essential societal functions.

- decentralizing the internet, but in a more pragmatic way then requiring fully blockchain-enabled abstract computers. better/more reliable languages enable a host of simple devices like small home servers that can act as the new backbone of a decentralized web. a consensus algorithm based on social trust rather than only cryptography. a public cloud company owned as a member cooperative to fill that gap. a universal typed messaging protocol with proof capabilities built in that enables arbitrarily powerful linking of everything. intentionally low-tech mobile devices that are open-source and were created by the crowdsell mechanism, enabling them to be fully in our control, and they use the universal typed protocol to have fully capability while still being very low-power and undistracting.

- using member cooperatives and the above decentralized internet to bring data *sovereignty* rather than dignity (which is just taking the current status quo as a given). machine learning algorithms should be deployed *by* the people in order to create value *for* them, not by some corporation seeking to extract value.

- maybe solving the disinformation problem with a more decentralized internet + data sovereignty + creating democratically controlled aggregation networks (or something) that use the same quadratic principles to limit noise and increase the *quality* of information and almost certainly therefore *massively decrease* the quantity of information. this one's tricky because we want to slowly reward people for doing good work and espousing reasonable things, and give them more voice, but it's difficult to figure out how this can happen without enabling demagogues.
  this is interesting, but I can't help disagree with it a little bit. in a way he's saying something obvious, that we should be aware of and engage in all levels of information, but in way that we're in control of. I do think he understates how much the firehose is the fault of corporations though, since part of the reason there's too much information is that they've made it so easy and low friction not just to create low quality information but to spread it world-wide. information can be *both* low latency and important, like important current events, or a fast-moving conversation between interesting well-informed people about something useful. the genuine usefulness of *some* low latency information doesn't justify the *existence* of the rest of the garbage low latency information, just like low-quality high-latency information like garbage books don't get a pass just because they're high-latency.
  also, the simplification of the global internet computer is anti-humanist. we don't need a weird metaphor, we can say the real thing. when people inhale information and exhale useful information, they're doing the same kind of knowledge work that has formed the basis of human knowledge acquisition forever. it's a connected peer network, just like it always has been. just because it's faster doesn't mean its suddenly subsumed the intrinsic value of each person.
  https://breakingsmart.substack.com/p/against-waldenponding

  also https://www.robinsloan.com/notes/orthographic/ and https://platforms.fyi/

  weights can be used to lower the cost of inducting someone or to harvest ephemeral points used in burning actions or to place weight on *documents* instead of more scarce things like people or namespaces
  *contextual scaling factors*, essentially a way to allow reputation to gather in a subcommunity
  the cost of "posting" in a space should increase with the number of people following that space, and increase as the moderation capacity goes down. a "global" space like a hashtag has no moderators, it's inherently a commons, so it's different than something like a namespaced "message board" where some group controls it. I still can't quite unravel exactly how
  should people be able to use their weights to control the scaling factor of a shared commons like that above? or should each follower simply be able to set their own personal scaling factor? how does decentralized reputation work in a democratic market like this?
  we're basically trying to create some kind of democratic market layer on top of ipfs. ipfs allows for documenting editing and linking, so this is about moderating the commons of public attention in a fair democratic way
  layering in ideas about a universal typed protocol makes this even more powerful. people can create arbitrary linked applications simply by producing datatypes, actions that manipulate those datatypes, and prices/mechanisms that moderate those actions

  one of the things we're really trying to do with an economic system like this is *merely mirror the effective aspects of trust in human societies*, while allowing them to scale up and have a computational measure. keeping that kind of simplicity and naturality is important to making it really catch on and for normal people to bother. also it has to be useful so that people care about joining.

A social network is mostly working when the reputation and trust embedded in the real life peer network is simply replicated by the application. We do have the chance to go a step further though and add corroborative tools
The faster something is spreading, then possibly the slower we should allow it to
Unlimited network spread of information is likely harmful for these reasons
Commodification of social ties, especially through the influencer dynamic, and the psychological hijacking of tools that are supposed to be mundane and are best when they're mundane into tools of personal brand creation and fame fishing
Misinformation obviously
The hard part is to allow intentional networks without still allowing out of control memes



# Persistently Democratic User Defined Organizations

In a political system it makes sense to simply give each citizen (which should be defined [merely by true residence](TODO)) a permanent and fixed amount of democratic weights.

However in private cooperatives where people can come and go, we need some way to assign weights, and often different people have legitimately different levels of concern and investment in the cooperative.

The [Golem Foundation](https://golem.foundation/2021/12/16/udo2.html) invented the concept of a user defined organization, one in which material participation in the organization grants the non-tradable right to govern it. The idea is intended to be used for blockchains, but it applies very naturally to any kind of organization where its most fair and reasonable to give governing control to those who support or interact with the organization. Consumer cooperatives based on individual purchases rather than steady membership or recurring dues are a perfect fit for this model, as well as those that are extremely capital intensive.

Applying this idea is simple. Users who supported the organization a long time ago should have less weight than someone who just barely supported it, and those who support it more should have more weight than those who support it less. To achieve both these principles, voting weight should be given proportional to amount of support, and then that voting weight should decay over time. Using quadratic scaling can prevent large supporters from dominating governance.

The exact parameters of the system such as the decay function or the definition of supporting the organization can be determined in a [constitutional document chosen with persistent voting](TODO). A portion of this system can be placed in a constitutional kernel to require an organizational fork or a harder commitment in order to change it.

A great example of a cooperative service that would perfectly fit this model is a grocery consumer cooperative. Although it might make sense to charge some small membership dues as is done by club retailers, if someone routinely buys huge amounts of food from a cooperative then it really does make sense for them to have more voting control.

<!-- The idea I'm particularly convinced would be a perfect fit for this model is a [cloud computing cooperative](TODO). Cloud computing usage is inherently variable, and the consumption of different users is dramatically different. It wouldn't make a lot of sense to give people paying for massive amounts of compute the same amount of governance control as those using only a bit. Remember, paying for compute would only give someone voting rights over the *cloud computing cooperative*, and shouldn't extend to other cooperative services. -->
