# Political Activism, and the Path To a Global Persistently Democratic Political Party

There are innumerable things we have to fix about our government and our laws. Rather than try to batter our beliefs into an existing political party's platform or create a new party with a specific platform and try to convince you that platform is the right one, why not just make the political party *itself* democratically controlled? If the only core idea of a party is persistent democratic control then it will be able to guide itself to the wishes of its members.
it's not good enough to just fight economically in the private sphere, we have to change our government. the cooperative and this political party are intentionally designed reinforce the efforts of the other as we push for total societal reform.

of course it might be nice to start with something.

here are a few big ideas that would dramatically change our society for the better. many of them are mathematically verified, and my hope is that each of them will be convincing enough to make it into the platform

first just ballot initatives to get approval voting into as many polities as possible. approval voting isn't perfect, but its a pragmatic first step we can use as a foothold for bigger changes.

now some more far out ideas, ones I hope inspire you about what's really possible, and help you realize how unfair and inefficient our existing systems are

harberger taxes, partial common ownership, and the persistently democratic offset
quadratic funding alongside persistent commitments
assurance contracts, retroactive funding, and abolishing intellectual property

point to more, theory of welfare and rights, simplified taxes, wealth taxes, democratic districts, persistent justice


and of course, wouldn't it be nice just to merge with existing parties instead of making a new one! of course, the requirement of a completely persistently democratic stucture is a hard line we shouldn't be willing to cross, so any organization we merge with would have to take up that idea
in terms of membership structure, it seems simple, because any cooperative must ask its members to support the cooperative in some way, members either pay some set membership dues or do some kind of volunteering. these two things could be compensated using the [user defined organization](TODO) mechanism, where paying membership dues or performing volunteer hours grants decaying weights. there should be a limit to the maximum monthly dues, if we're going to try to court larger donations the benefits should only be intangible and social in nature. the constitutional kernel can define a maximum monthly donation and set a hardcoded hourly amount of weights for volunteering.
members gain voting rights, and can come to member meetings and gatherings.







- a simplified tax system, with democratically counterbalanced harberger taxes at the center, and then democratically chosen externality taxes on anything that fell into an "interfering" area of rights. also, with the democratically counterbalanced harberger taxes allowing some kind of "lockin" mechanism that enables some land to be semi-permanently protected, representing the reality that the destruction/exploitation of most natural treasures would be inherenly irreversible and so the legal mechanism that protects them should be as well.
  by allowing democratic weights to be used to offset harberger taxes, or to inflation fund democratic projects, we've essentially created a way for economic value to exchange with all other forms of social utility. that's essential, since the biggest potential problem with harberger taxes is that they only account for economic utility and discard all others.

- bottom up self associating administrative districts, or holistic districts

- a democratically controlled monetary system, wherein the same weights used in elections and the harberger tax can be used to produce inflation funding, but as time goes on the inflation gets more expensive. the system's default state is 0% inflation

- refer to theories of rights and the "fair exchange" idea from above.

- abolishing intellectual property with the crowdsell mechanism and quadratic funding. intellectual *labor* instead. intellectual property isn't like normal property, because its *intrinsic utility* (although *maybe* not its market price utility) actually *increases* with its increased social use (generally). this means that our current property-based regimes are inherently fictional and inefficient, and only really exist to enable capitalistic extraction. intellectual property is probably the chief enabler of current inequality, because it's entirely arbitrary and absolute. someone can own *an idea* and use that as an immense leverage point to extract wealth from society. also, investigating how the crowdsell mechanism would interact with just normal publicly (quadratically) funded research. also, investigating how it would change the stucture of the economy, and lend itself greatly to much much smaller profit-seeking innovation companies (which are perfectly suited to thrive in a fluid university described below) alongside larger member cooperative administrative companies.

- using these ideas of efficient democratic ownership as the basis of a universal basic income. essentially what we've done is instead of merely bolstering labor in the fight between labor and capital, we've *subsumed* capital *by* labor. we can create a society where everyone is part of the ownership class and benefits from the passive income. this is especially crucial (and more possible!) because of the portent of automation. if we don't create a society of democratic ownership, inequality will produce either a crushing techo-feudalism, or a terrifying eradication scenario.

- it's possible for people to use their democratic weights to gain increased access to collective resources. Since we're already using them as a means of mediating access to influence and land, it makes sense to do so with things like healthcare or other kinds of resources. The goal in such a system then is to raise the floor of guaranteed access by increasing budgets or merely investing in innovation.

- decentralizing justice and policing, by having "justice tribes" that represent everyone and bring grievances against other tribes, with some randomly selected panel of other outside justice tribes acting as mediators/arbiters. also, restorative justice?

- decentralizing the military and public defense, through some similar mechanism as above, with some kind of coming-of-age ritual military service thing that intentionally gets people out of their communities into far-away places to serve them, and is focused on producing compassionate and learned warrior "monks" rather than brainwashing people into being a mindless cog in the military machine.

- a better version of esperanto, and having the whole world fully embrace a global trade language.
