we don't really need many of the kinds of decentralization people are playing around with right now

if you aren't doing cutting edge research in computational cryptography, distributed systems, or economics, then you aren't really doing useful work to forward blockchains. the best you can do is create buzz. the only notable exceptions are systems that are attempt to encode real *computational* scarcity (only computational because its the only kind of scarcity that can be verified by these networks without outside organizations) and therefore create a perfectly fluid decentralized market for a real good or service. so protocols that encode useful storage or computational capacity to the network are already completely useful, such as filecoin or dfinity, etc. very importantly, since only protocols that encode *real* scarcity will ultimately survive, this means *these protocols will do nothing to qualitatively reverse wealth inequality or centralized control*. real wealth and power comes from ownership and control of truly scarce resources, so if these protocols merely encode real scarcity, existing holders of vast resources will remain the most powerful actors in new systems. these protocols will merely make markets more efficient, not reverse the rights abuses that created the status quo. mere markets are not the same thing as true democracy
decentralized protocols aren't going to give small actors access to [rack-scale or even data-center scale hardware design](https://oxide.computer/), so although they won't be entirely locked out of the compute market, they'll still be massively outmatched by centralized players in the large number of non-niche computing cases.

decentralized *identity* is the most important unsolved problem.

importantly, NFTs aren't the thing that will change how we think about property. without enforcement, a deed of ownership is completely useless. if we want to revolutionize our understanding of property, we have to do so at the governmental level. however, blockchains can be invaluable in giving our governments a secure and transparent computational foundation.


the only systems that really have immediate utility are filecoin and other systems that are rooted in *real* scarcity.

tokenomics as an idea has been dramatically over-applied. if a currency doesn't stably maintain a rough inflation rate, then it isn't actually valuable as a currency. if a token is ostensibly a "utility token" but its price isn't inexorably tied to the real scarcity limiting the underlying work then it's irrational and will be out-competed by something else

there's a theoretical limit of these kinds of semi-cooperative decentralized ledgers, which is one that has zero (marginal) transaction costs, changes state fast enough to be below the threshold of human perception, and is only limited by real computational scarcity. however such a system would completely nullify the two primary incentive systems in the blockchain space (artificially scarce coins that will speculatively rise in value, transaction fees). however such a system *is* possible if the network has a model of "mutual obligation" where each person-linked account is simply expected to do work to secure and audit the ledger, and is exiled if it doesn't meet its obligations or commits fraud. the only way to pay for the development of such a system is with public goods funding, since by its very design it doesn't allow any other funding models. and again, that design achieves a theoretical limit of usefulness! so if we *have* a way of provisioning public goods enough to fund such a thing, then it will inevitably replace and outstrip other models


fiat currencies are useful *because* they are fiat currencies, their value as a social technology is entirely defined by these two qualities:

- they maintain a roughly stable inflation, *therefore* roughly encoding the real scarcity of available labor and resources in the underlying economy
- they are enforced as a legal tender, removing all the deadweight loss from all the coordination costs necessary in secondary currency market. standardization and unification are useful!


If a monetary system has any stable, non negative inflation rate then it will rationally track any economy, possibly even if its shrinking?
