theory of wealth, welfare, and progress, two "lever" arrangements (`wealth = available_resources * labor * technological_leverage`)

- not sure if these equations actually make sense. the lever analogy makes sense, but what this really means is that wealth is something equivalent to "moved resources", in the physics sense of "work performed = mass * distance". so prosperity is really a *measure* of how much effort it takes to move one "unit" of welfare, so this is inherently "relative" in the sense that it is computed from the frame of each actor in the system. it might take very little effort to move a unit of welfare for one person, but that might represent an externalization of effort to someone else in an extractive manner. leverage in both these cases then isn't really a "quantity", but a description of the ratio of effort required to move the same unit. the lever itself defines that ratio. leverage in this situation is kind of like we're moving resources into a configuration that *replaces* labor.
- `potential_prosperity = potential_moved_welfare = wealth_leverage * welfare_leverage * potential_labor`
- `potential_wealth = available_resources * (technological_leverage * potential_labor)`
- `wealth = moved_resources = technological_leverage * expended_labor`
- `prosperity = wealth * welfare_leverage`
- this theory of wealth and progress is inherently *step-indexed*, much like a computer program. the leverage power of the previous step's arrangement of matter effects how much we can achieve in this step. also probably important to add some "decay" function to each step, to represent the concept that some things require maintenance. also "waste" or "entropy" functions to encode carbon emissions and heat and unusable byproducts. in the step-indexed view, *current* potential wealth is the total amount of resources you could move based on current leverage, labor power, and available resources, and potential prosperity is the amount of welfare you could produce based on welfare leverage and wealth. so there's a raw resource leverage coefficient and a welfare leverage coefficient associated with any current resource arrangement. a simple analogy for a system like this is a 3d grid space with two possible welfare uses and materials for a raw lever, and the functions assign leverage numbers based on current position/orientation of the lever
