universal voluntary constitution, is it possible to do this without being imperial?


The construct of the nation state is harmful and dangerous in many ways. Different nation states define completely different definitions of human rights, and have wildly different governance models. Borders between countries harm the human rights of any who would wish to cross them, and create immense economic and social inefficiencies.

If we're really truly confident our systems of rights and governance are fair and voluntary, we would like a way for anyone in the world to voluntarily bring themselves under our constitution. The difficulty of doing this is that previous nations who have defined systems like this have essentially always used them as a moral shield for imperialist ambitions. The question we have is if it's possible to define a system that actually structurally promises that any area who uses the expansion system to become part of our constitution has done so because there is a legitimate and voluntary desire from the people of that area to do so.

# Description

We've already shared our hope of creating verified and provably optimal philosophical frameworks for understanding consciousness, utility, rights, and voting systems. If we were able to produce such frameworks and really have such an unimpeachably high confidence in their universal correctness, we would greatly desire to see them implemented for all conscious beings.

However, this is very dangerous territory. The desire to spread a particular cultural idea that a group has high confidence in has many times in history been an excuse to pursue imperialism and oppress others.

How can we transcend nationalism while at the same time allowing a pluralistic society? What limits should we place on intervening to prevent human rights abuses in other countries?

We feel that the only way to possibly justify "annexing" a portion of land as part of a unified society is if the inhabitants of that land demonstrate clear democratic will to do so. This is tricky though, since by definition these people are outside our society, we have to have some way of verifying them and their wishes. If we
What rituals can we use for citizens of a neighboring country to say they want to join? How do we know what land
Does it make sense to make the nature of the rituals such that they can't really be done in wartime? Probably not, since disgruntled people could just start conflicts to prevent joining.
Also how do we do it in a way that allows the *people* to demonstrate their democratic will rather than relying on the existing government?
Maybe we just accept that a people who really wants to join but has a government that prevents the rituals simply has to overthrow their government first? That's frustrating, and it makes us prone to prod along that kind of activity.

Perhaps it's this simple:

- We state that any country neighbors ours can join us as a distinct administrative district. When that happens, we have certain types of officials that we send to help the new country establish it's systems of democratic decision making, and convert any old structures for that use. They of course can then change their districts, fluidly merging in whatever natural way with democratic borders.
- We need some kind of ritual for verifying new voters, and we should always even be using it within the existing society. Since such a ritual would almost certainly hinge on some kind of rotational vouching system, and we need some root of trust. The officials we send would perform an initial vouching ritual with some initial group of people. Since the vouching system merely requires people to make a single trip to a voting office and be vouched, it could spread through the new land fairly quickly, and all people could gradually become vouched.
Is it crazy to use biometrics?

Maybe joining would be contingent on the vouching process? Perhaps we simply set up some initial seed office with trusted officials and vouch new people and slowly create more ad hoc such offices as the vouching proceeds, and only once we feel the vouching has got past a certain level of confidence do we consider the area joined?



By allowing *all* immigration into the society merely requiring registration of all entrants, and making residence the only requirement for citizenship, we create a society that will tend to win simply if it performs well. If we truly believe that our systems are fair and will produce greatest prosperity, we should be confident that more people entering our society from others will put pressure on other societies to change themselves to be more fair or to simply join ours.



# Benefits

I'm excited about this idea because


# Potential Objections


# Open Questions

