---
title: "Common Partial Ownership"
incomplete: true
---

- partial common ownership
  - authoritarian monopoly
  - theorems of welfare economics
  - lazy monopoly
  - property taxes
  - harberger taxes
  - common resource rights
  - point to uselessness of landlords
  - point to myths of libertarianism
  - point to free borders
  - point to chapters related to political change







# Political Activism, and the Path To a Global Persistently Democratic Political Party

There are innumerable things we have to fix about our government and our laws. Rather than try to batter our beliefs into an existing political party's platform or create a new party with a specific platform and try to convince you that platform is the right one, why not just make the political party *itself* democratically controlled? If the only core idea of a party is persistent democratic control then it will be able to guide itself to the wishes of its members.
it's not good enough to just fight economically in the private sphere, we have to change our government. the cooperative and this political party are intentionally designed to reinforce the efforts of the other as we push for total societal reform.

of course it might be nice to start with something.

here are a few big ideas that would dramatically change our society for the better. many of them are mathematically verified, and my hope is that each of them will be convincing enough to make it into the platform

first just ballot initatives to get approval voting into as many polities as possible. approval voting isn't perfect, but its a pragmatic first step we can use as a foothold for bigger changes.

now some more far out ideas, ones I hope inspire you about what's really possible, and help you realize how unfair and inefficient our existing systems are

## Common Resource Taxes

in order to create a system where every person is equally able to maximize their welfare regardless of their starting position, they have to have equal signaling weight for scarce resources. in order to maintain efficient infrastructural buildup we need to preserve the effect of money in economies, but the idea that if someone owns something then that absolutely under no circumstances can be negotiated is stupid.
why do we think that property is just as inalienable as one's body? where did that come from?
not only does it not make sense, it's actively harmful. since physical property isn't directly *attached* to your experience of welfare, then disallowing that property to find its highest social use is silly.
we've essentially written the "dibs" rule into our society. whoever gets to something first gets to decide how its used, and decide what happens to it after they die. this flies directly in the face of highest social use

so, I'm going to describe a system of taxation that solves this problem, the problem of "allocative efficiency". the unaltered form of this idea would be really bad, but let me describe it just so we can talk about how to fix it

describe COST

this would have a bunch of problems
everything only valued in terms of money, the only qualities of property that would determine its use would be those related to financial returns or the wishes of the wealthy
it would be jarring and hard for people to suddenly have things taken from them. just how persistent voting tries to get rid of "election hangovers", we don't want "valuation hangovers"
there's a pretty nasty attack where someone can buy something from someone they suspect values it more, and then expect their money back plus essentially a ransom in the form of the new extra cash the other person had to come up with to buy their thing back.
how would debt and subsidies work? doesn't that incentivize taking out larger debts than the assets that back them? in order to transition to this system we would have to just comp people the difference between existing mortgages and stabilized prices.

solutions
allow persistent weights alongside a monetary valuation. this means we can bake purely social valuation into this system. the valuations of individuals and groups would tend to beat purely profit seeking interests
have a stabilization period, just like in persistent voting. this means existing holders can react to bids, preventing them from just being attacks. it would be an actual negotiation, and people who wanted to sell would be the best people to buy from.

details
you can bind together pieces of property so they have to be bought together or not at all. this would make it more doable to apply this system to all the random crap we all have, since you would just bind it together with your house but not raise the price at all. fancy rich people stuff on the other hand is actually valued by others, so it would have a non-zero valuation. the stabilization system would mean that the real thing being taxed would be tension in the supply, only really applying to most things when there really isn't enough of them.
there's a hack where you can pretend you don't own something and then not pay taxes on it, but then you don't legally own it! if someone steals it from you they could literally just keep it and start paying taxes and there would be no legal redress. you also can't have it insured.
prices for pretty much everything would drop to a more realistic number, so don't worry that your taxes would go through the roof.

in general a system like this would have a few consequences
it would be impossible to "corner the market". just being able to tell that something will be more valuable wouldn't be that important, which is good, since that just encourages hoarding and artificial scarcity. we want to reward production, not middlemen
being a landlord would be practically impossible. the only reason landlords can exist is because they can leverage the unfair "dibs" property system to collectively lock out people without saved capital. if you had money and only cared about making more money, why would you build houses that people would buy once and then never give you money again when you can build apartments and make money forever? landlords add absolutely no value to society, property management can be contracted directly by home-owners. landlords only extract value through the law and the privilege of getting there first.
supply would never get artificially squeezed. the housing market is stupid because the people who want to build new owner-occupied houses can't, partially because of the inherently anti-social extractive incentives of capital I just talked about, but also because of the laziness and privilege of existing owners. with a system like this in place it would be much easier for cooperative housing or other kinds of publicly beneficial land projects to happen.

it's probably a pretty tough sell to say a full common resource tax should be implemented immediately, because we need to test it and there are lots of hurdles to jump. however some things could immediately, like things the government already completely mediates access to, like public parking spots or bands of the electromagnetic spectrum, or even intellectual property deeds. web domains would be a perfect thing to apply a system like this to
it also applies perfectly to situations where we need to cap some harmful activity. we already have a cap and trade system for sulfur-dioxide emissions, and we should have one for carbon emissions. common resource taxes make even more sense for those kinds of systems.

## Democratic Districts

we already talked about how persistent constitutions can be nested, which means that we can nest them according to persistently chosen district maps. the lines of our political entities don't really make any sense, and don't actually put together groups of people who have shared problems they need to coordinate to solve. dividing administrative areas makes sense, since it allows us to delegate responsibility and makes sure that governance gets more contextually aware as it gets more specific.
congressional districts don't make sense, and partially that's just a problem we could solve with normal persistent democracy since we should just have something better than our congress. but if we are going to have districts in any situation, they ought to at least roughly track the boundaries of real communities, as decided by those communities.

## Abolishing Intellectual Property

having property rules for physical stuff makes sense (even if we should structure them differently), because physical stuff is rivalrous. if I have an apple, you can't also have that exact apple without splitting it in half and both of us getting less than we would by ourselves. we need ways to negotiate the splitting and sharing and giving.
intellectual property is inherently a fiction, because it isn't rivalrous, it isn't scarce. the labor that produces it is, but the thing itself doesn't even exist, it's just patterns, codes we can decipher or build machines to decipher. it makes sense to have the right to be recognized as the creator of a work, because doing so is simply acknowledging reality and preventing fraud, but owning intellectual property means you have the right to stop the actions of people who might have never ever heard of you, just because they're doing the same patterns as you.
metaphor: if I can somehow patent the idea of waving my hand in a particular shape, then people who accidentally wave their hand are violating the law? how ridiculous is that?

intellectual property law seems to tacitly acknowledge this, because there's an arbitrary limit on length of ownership. the law admits that ultimately the only reason we're allowing someone to control an intellectual work is because we eventually want it to pass into the public domain. my claim is that the intellectual property paradigm is a completely stupid way to do this.
we've already talked about quadratic funding and how it can be used in a persistently democratic way. using assurance contracts and a more rigorous form of crowdfunding we can apply persistent funding to intellectual labor

### Democratic Prizes (already finished work)

someone's already completed something in private
they submit a description of what they've done, and make promises about its content. they also set a price
they convince people to pledge to it with money and weights
when its funded, its revealed and made public domain. there's a waiting period before the money changes hands where the funders can allege it's fraudulent

works for profit seeking entities, those with capital to get them through the process of doing the work

### Democratic Grants (proposed future work)

someone has an idea for specific work to do
they submit a description, and a timesliced budget with milestones. they also choose a reward amount they get at the end for success
they convince people to pledge to it with money and weights
when its funded, the money is released timeslice by timeslice, and the funders can vote in a commitment every cycle whether to continue to the next cycle. if the project is canceled the remaining money is refunded.
if the project is successful the creators get the final reward
if they go overschedule they eat into the reward amount until it's gone. if the money runs out then they have to pitch a new continuation project

the original proposals for ideas can of course come from the public rather than creators.

## Wealth Taxes

Let's imagine a society with one extremely wealthy person, and a bunch of poor people. Let's say the government in this society fully enforces a naive idea of property rights. Let's say this society is democratic, even persistently democratic, but its constitution prevents taxes from taking an unequal percentage of wealth from any member.
It's pretty obvious the extremely wealthy person will be the dictator of this society, regardless of the democratic structure. If a very wealthy person can pay most of society 3x their yearly income every year for as long as they keep doing whatever the wealthy person says, then whatever they want will happen. Even if people get tired of them, it will be easy for that person to just buy out enough of the group or the collaborators of the group, so their strength won't be enough to actually do anything.
An even simpler statement: how many people with guns, or people operating the justice system, can this person buy off?

We're also assuming that if someone was really able to accrue that much wealth, it wasn't because they really made that massive a marginal contribution to society. They did it by leveraging some vulnerability in our systems of ownership that allowed them to exert undue leverage over others. A tax like this is the failsafe mechanism, something that will always kick in and correct things if we don't happen to catch something at a lower level.

a bunch of our tax designs suck, partially because they're regressive and unfair, but mostly because they're so easy to evade. income taxes are particularly really stupid. obviously because of the capital gains loophole, but also just because making an income isn't an inherently externality producing event. making income doesn't impose any burden on society.


The idea is to structure a continuous S curve function such that the inflection point in the curve represents a safe level of wealth, an amount that doesn't give the owner enough social power to distort markets or institutions, because they don't have enough marginal leverage over others.
we want the curve to reshape according to the inequality and purchasing power, or the amount of latent marginal leverage, in the society. so if a society has corrected and is healthy, then wealth taxes aren't as much of a thing
if someone makes $10,000, and someone offers them a bribe of $50,000, then the offerer kinda owns this person now. they're offering to move them from crippling poverty to merely laborious poverty. in contrast if someone makes $100,000 and they're offered a bribeof $50,000, then that's attractive sure, but that person can much more easily say "eh, I'm good" if there's something unsavory or troubling about the offer. it is more likely they're more worried about social standing or other intangible things than the person with $10,000
the presence of extremely desperate people alongside extremely wealthy people is literally dangerous for everyone.

I'm not sure what math makes this all make sense, I'm more proposing an interesting set of principles and a design challenge

---

point to more, theory of welfare and rights, simplified taxes, persistent justice


and of course, wouldn't it be nice just to merge with an existing party instead of making a new one! of course, the requirement of a completely persistently democratic stucture is a hard line we shouldn't be willing to cross, so any organization we merge with would have to take up that idea
in terms of membership structure, it seems simple, because any cooperative must ask its members to support the cooperative in some way, members either pay some set membership dues or do some kind of volunteering. these two things could be compensated using the [user defined organization](TODO) mechanism, where paying membership dues or performing volunteer hours grants decaying weights. there should be a limit to the maximum monthly dues, if we're going to try to court larger donations the benefits should only be intangible and social in nature. the constitutional kernel can define a maximum monthly donation and set a hardcoded hourly amount of weights for volunteering.
members gain voting rights, and can come to member meetings and gatherings.

there are lots of decisions to make, and I don't think the best way for them to be figured out is for me to sit alone and try to figure them all out.

<!--
- a simplified tax system, with democratically counterbalanced harberger taxes at the center, and then democratically chosen externality taxes on anything that fell into an "interfering" area of rights. also, with the democratically counterbalanced harberger taxes allowing some kind of "lockin" mechanism that enables some land to be semi-permanently protected, representing the reality that the destruction/exploitation of most natural treasures would be inherenly irreversible and so the legal mechanism that protects them should be as well.
  by allowing democratic weights to be used to offset harberger taxes, or to inflation fund democratic projects, we've essentially created a way for economic value to exchange with all other forms of social utility. that's essential, since the biggest potential problem with harberger taxes is that they only account for economic utility and discard all others.

- bottom up self associating administrative districts, or holistic districts

- a democratically controlled monetary system, wherein the same weights used in elections and the harberger tax can be used to produce inflation funding, but as time goes on the inflation gets more expensive. the system's default state is 0% inflation

- refer to theories of rights and the "fair exchange" idea from above.

- abolishing intellectual property with the crowdsell mechanism and quadratic funding. intellectual *labor* instead. intellectual property isn't like normal property, because its *intrinsic utility* (although *maybe* not its market price utility) actually *increases* with its increased social use (generally). this means that our current property-based regimes are inherently fictional and inefficient, and only really exist to enable capitalistic extraction. intellectual property is probably the chief enabler of current inequality, because it's entirely arbitrary and absolute. someone can own *an idea* and use that as an immense leverage point to extract wealth from society. also, investigating how the crowdsell mechanism would interact with just normal publicly (quadratically) funded research. also, investigating how it would change the stucture of the economy, and lend itself greatly to much much smaller profit-seeking innovation companies (which are perfectly suited to thrive in a fluid university described below) alongside larger member cooperative administrative companies.

- using these ideas of efficient democratic ownership as the basis of a universal basic income. essentially what we've done is instead of merely bolstering labor in the fight between labor and capital, we've *subsumed* capital *by* labor. we can create a society where everyone is part of the ownership class and benefits from the passive income. this is especially crucial (and more possible!) because of the portent of automation. if we don't create a society of democratic ownership, inequality will produce either a crushing techo-feudalism, or a terrifying eradication scenario.

- it's possible for people to use their democratic weights to gain increased access to collective resources. Since we're already using them as a means of mediating access to influence and land, it makes sense to do so with things like healthcare or other kinds of resources. The goal in such a system then is to raise the floor of guaranteed access by increasing budgets or merely investing in innovation.

- decentralizing justice and policing, by having "justice tribes" that represent everyone and bring grievances against other tribes, with some randomly selected panel of other outside justice tribes acting as mediators/arbiters. also, restorative justice?

- decentralizing the military and public defense, through some similar mechanism as above, with some kind of coming-of-age ritual military service thing that intentionally gets people out of their communities into far-away places to serve them, and is focused on producing compassionate and learned warrior "monks" rather than brainwashing people into being a mindless cog in the military machine.

- a better version of esperanto, and having the whole world fully embrace a global trade language.
-->












As we explored questions about rights we encountered the reality that in order for all people to have equal rights, they must have equal claim to the universe.

It should be obvious that our simplistic rules of ownership of some types of resources don't meet this criterion. Ownership of land, the most critical of all resources, is permanent and irrevocable without the owner's consent, and [only relatively recently have property taxes been used to prevent land from permanently accruing to small groups](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landed_gentry). Even in modernity, [land is often zoned and allocated very inefficiently](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hLrFyjGZ9NU). It is obvious given our definition of rights that permanent irrevocable land ownership is a form of monopolistic [regulatory capture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regulatory_capture), and interferes with all Beings' rights to own that same land or gain benefit from it indirectly.

However if we propose forcibly seizing and arbitrarily dividing land, we quickly run afoul of the Welfare imcomparability problem, since we can't know how different individuals value land and therefore can't possibly divide it truly equally. What we need is some democratic system that allows every being to equally signal need for common resources in a way that maximizes Welfare for all.

## COST *almost* does the job.

In [Radical Markets](http://radicalmarkets.com/), the authors describe the inherent monopolistic problem of land ownership in detail, and offer a form of taxation that very neatly counteracts it called the COST, an acronym for "Common Ownership Self-Assessed Tax". This mechanism provably maximizes allocative efficiency of any good.

However, as will become clear when we describe the tax, it would obviously skew many social decisions to only consider *financial* merit, ignoring other non-monetary forms of value. Radical Markets also proposes the use of the tax for *all* forms of property, which is difficult to make consistent with our system of rights.

This chapter describes a modified version of the tax that patches these potential problems using principles of Persistent Democracy.

## Description

First a description of the original version of the mechanism. No specific type of asset is assumed, since all will behave the same in practice.

- The owner of an asset would at any time state their self-assessed value of the asset. This price represents the value they believe they gain from the asset.
- They pay a flat tax rate on this self-assessed value per time period, such as 1% per year.
- At any time, anyone else can make a credible offer to buy the asset at a price higher than the owner's self-assessed price by placing funds in escrow. The owner can then choose to either:
  - Accept the offer and sell the asset.
  - Decline the offer. If they do this, they *must* raise their self-assessed price to match the credible offer, and subsequently pay the tax on that higher price.

This system is very elegant and simple, and optimizes allocative efficiency. It is a market-like way of ensuring that all property taxes are perfectly accurate. To learn more about why this system is so efficient, [feel free to read the original chapter in Radical Markets](http://radicalmarkets.com/chapters/property-is-monopoly/).

There's a very critical problem with this mechanism however, that it only values an asset in *monetary* terms. It will ensure assets are allocated to whoever monetarily values them most, but any other form of value that doesn't structurally create monetary income will eventually be outbid.

However if we extend this mechanism in a way that allows Persistent Democratic Weights to somehow offset the mechanism, we can allow all other forms of social welfare to compete democratically with monetary value. The simple name I give this tax is the Common Resource tax, since it can apply to any resource that is inherently held in common between all people as defined by our system of rights.

At this point I have two potential ideas for how democratic weights can be used as offsets: either by making their placement decrease the tax obligation quadratically in a form of tax deduction, allowing the owner to state a higher price and strengthen their continued claim; or by requiring their placement to be matched by any potential buyer, changing the *kinds* of buyers who could conceivably actually use the mechanism, allowing the owner to state a lower price but not face the same risk.

Before we discuss these alternatives let's restate the whole mechanism with some unknown offset present.

- The owner of any asset would at any time have a self-assessed value as before, which is used to calculate their tax obligation. Also as before, anyone can make a credible offer that must be accepted if the owner doesn't wish to pay a higher tax.
- However the owner can place their Democratic Weights on the asset to strengthen their claim somehow. Since this offset uses democratic weights it would tend to favor larger groups or those with a stronger relative preference intensity.
- The previously discussed Persistent Funding mechanism allows any project to gain priority for funding from a Quadratic pool or inflation funding, meaning it can also be done to collect money for credible offers on assets. This means groups can democratically fund public asset acquisitions.

Now let's look at the strengths and weaknesses of the two potential offset systems.

- **Deduction Strengths**: this system is very simple, and it's also very uniform. This likely retains the market-like aspects of the mechanism best, since it simply allows conversion of democratic weights into a currency deduction.
- **Deduction Weaknesses**: since we must have some known ratio of weights to currency to make the deduction uniform (the deduction can't be in percentage terms since that would unfairly favor those holding more expensive assets), we have to devise a way to determine that number. Although this could be done by somehow relating the value to average purchasing power, this is a pretty fraught project where we can very easily make arbitrary and therefore unfair decisions. It's also possible that deductions are more unstable and don't allow sufficiently strong democratic protection of common resources, and that they would not do enough to allay people's frustrations.
- **Matching Strengths**: this system is also simple, and allows very strong protection of common resources for socially legitimate causes, likely being much more stable and socially healthy. It also sidesteps any need to relate weights to currency, since the weights must be matched *in addition* to a monetary bid.
- **Matching Weaknesses**: there's a degree of arbitrariness to this system, since currency and weights are no longer on a uniform scale. It's possible this version would allow too much arbitrary capture and protection in a way that would harm society.

As a sidenote, it is natural to also include some kind of "conservation" mechanism alongside this tax. Since things like national parks or wildlife refuges have some socially intrinsic value which can't be restored once destroyed, it should be possible for some sufficiently strong democratic weights action to *permanently* place them under public ownership. A future chapter discusses this question further.

## Benefits

- Common Resource taxes ensure all beings have equal claim to common resources without having to forcibly seize and arbitrarily divide them.
- A democratic offset ensures *all* forms of social welfare, not just monetary value, are used to determine ownership of common resources, while still allowing private market uses when they are welfare positive. In very high-demand areas such as dense cities it is common for any kind of public space to be gradually starved away, and can only be ensured through acts of fiat by potentially corruptible public administrators. A Common Resource tax allows public parks, gardens, recreation centers, libraries, or even sources for essential utilities such as water to be acquired and controlled democratically.
- A COST-style tax has provably optimal allocative efficiency, ensuring all owners prices are accurately stated and assets given to those who value them most.
- A COST-style tax is very difficult to cheat or manipulate, and our democratic offset only allows them to be reduced through legitimate democratic will.

## Potential Objections

- Many in our society have grown accustomed to owning land forever, despite how intrinsically unfair such ownership is. It might be difficult to implement a system that could require you to sell something you value highly, and could be somewhat stressful for many once implemented. The democratic offset reduces this problem, but doesn't remove it.
- Using the same supply of democratic weights for voting and tax reduction might disadvantage the poor, since they could be caught in a constant struggle between voting and protecting themselves financially. A simple solution to this problem could be to split democratic weights into two categories, legislative used for decisions about rules and rights and justice officials, and administrative used for decisions about zoning and prioritization and taxes and democratic funding.
- A Common Resource Tax easily allows property allocation to scale to new areas, such as we will certainly encounter when traveling beyond our planet (!!!).

## Open Questions

Despite how obviously the democratic offset in principle improves the original COST tax, it brings with it a devil in the details we must tame. We've already mentioned two potential ways to democratically offset the tax, but there could be others. Further, even the exact details of the two alternatives aren't all known, such as:

- For deductions, how to relate weights and currency.
- For deductions, should we allow citizens to use Democratic Weights to make some tax burden *negative*, producing a tax credit? I don't feel so, and would prefer to instead democratically invest all levied taxes in public goods. However some argument asserting the opposite could certainly be made.
- For deductions, if the owner can place Democratic Weights to strengthen their claim, then shouldn't others be able to place Democratic Weights to counteract that claim? Further, should it be possible for groups to counteract a price *beyond* the original unadjusted price, thereby *increasing* the tax obligation of the owner? Should they be able to reduce the price at which they could buy the asset?
- For matching, should we allow some kind of "fastening" system owners can use to make their weights hold for a longer period of time and therefore require any matching buyer to do the same?
- For both, should we allow owners to "respond" to credible offers, or simply assume the owner would have set a higher price if they valued the asset more? Would it make sense to use this more "pure auction" form for any assets without any democratic weights? If we did that, how would we allow owners to lower their prices without simply lowering them arbitrarily and then responding briefly to credible offers? Might we have some "price decay" function that only gradually allows owners to lower their price after credible offers have been made?

At this point I'm leaning toward the matching system, since I'd rather err on the side of too much democratic protection than too little. But this is a question I have to investigate.

And one more potential change:

- Perhaps zoning should allow some districts to not use Common Resource taxes? Especially purely residential ones? I personally don't feel this is a good idea, but it might address the fear and stress of the mechanism, and should be considered. A simpler way to allay the fear is to simply lower the tax rates.
