---
title: "A Realistic Plan for Fundamental Change"
incomplete: true
---

- making it all happen
  - lots of big changes, many risky. eat an elephant one bite at a time
  - my plan, which aligns perfectly with the previous three chapters
    - labs
    - political party, point to free borders, point to chapters related to political change
    - cooperative
  - I need help!
  - point to Persistent Democracy and EA
  - conclusion







# Persistently Democratic Cooperative

- "startup energy", tech forward
- aggressively innovative
- aggressively expansionary
- begin with online credit union?

---

## journalism and news media

have no reason to be concerned with audience welfare

real customers are advertisers

coverage will *never* align with audience

cooperative ownership solves that problem

---

## social media

have no reason to be concerned with user welfare

real customers are advertisers

algorithms and governance will *never* align with users

cooperative ownership solves that problem

<!--
surveillance and recommender systems. the social problems created by large tech firms, especially those related to media and information, have become pressing and obvious. many people discuss how to solve these problems by somehow reforming the companies or regulations, but I think the *real* solution to these problems is quite obvious, cooperative ownership. the real problem at the heart of problematic companies of all kinds (not only tech companies) is the incentives of the companies aren't aligned with those of their customers or society at large. cooperative ownership directly solves the problem of alignment with customers (since they are the owning decision-makers), and obliquely solves the problem of alignment with society since membership in a cooperative is open.
-->

---

## grocery stores/junk food producers

have no reason to be concerned with customer welfare

no reason not to leverage psychological weaknesses

cooperative ownership solves that problem

---

## planned obsolescence

have no reason to be concerned about waste and annoyance

no reason not to leverage bias for convenience and market powerlessness

cooperative ownership solves that problem

---

## internet service providers

networks naturally form geographic monopolies

companies capture local government officials/contracts

no reason to be concerned with customer satisfaction

cooperative ownership solves that problem

---

## open source software cooperatives?

an evolution of [sponsorware system](https://calebporzio.com/sponsorware)

- software is fully open source
- only sponsors and contributors can:
  - durably file issues
  - vote on feature roadmap
  - vote on maintainer list


- <chapter-ref slug="/open-source-project-cooperatives"/>









# Political Activism, and the Path To a Global Persistently Democratic Political Party

There are innumerable things we have to fix about our government and our laws. Rather than try to batter our beliefs into an existing political party's platform or create a new party with a specific platform and try to convince you that platform is the right one, why not just make the political party *itself* democratically controlled? If the only core idea of a party is persistent democratic control then it will be able to guide itself to the wishes of its members.
it's not good enough to just fight economically in the private sphere, we have to change our government. the cooperative and this political party are intentionally designed to reinforce the efforts of the other as we push for total societal reform.

of course it might be nice to start with something.

here are a few big ideas that would dramatically change our society for the better. many of them are mathematically verified, and my hope is that each of them will be convincing enough to make it into the platform

first just ballot initatives to get approval voting into as many polities as possible. approval voting isn't perfect, but its a pragmatic first step we can use as a foothold for bigger changes.

now some more far out ideas, ones I hope inspire you about what's really possible, and help you realize how unfair and inefficient our existing systems are





## Democratic Districts

we already talked about how persistent constitutions can be nested, which means that we can nest them according to persistently chosen district maps. the lines of our political entities don't really make any sense, and don't actually put together groups of people who have shared problems they need to coordinate to solve. dividing administrative areas makes sense, since it allows us to delegate responsibility and makes sure that governance gets more contextually aware as it gets more specific.
congressional districts don't make sense, and partially that's just a problem we could solve with normal persistent democracy since we should just have something better than our congress. but if we are going to have districts in any situation, they ought to at least roughly track the boundaries of real communities, as decided by those communities.

## Abolishing Intellectual Property

having property rules for physical stuff makes sense (even if we should structure them differently), because physical stuff is rivalrous. if I have an apple, you can't also have that exact apple without splitting it in half and both of us getting less than we would by ourselves. we need ways to negotiate the splitting and sharing and giving.
intellectual property is inherently a fiction, because it isn't rivalrous, it isn't scarce. the labor that produces it is, but the thing itself doesn't even exist, it's just patterns, codes we can decipher or build machines to decipher. it makes sense to have the right to be recognized as the creator of a work, because doing so is simply acknowledging reality and preventing fraud, but owning intellectual property means you have the right to stop the actions of people who might have never ever heard of you, just because they're doing the same patterns as you.
metaphor: if I can somehow patent the idea of waving my hand in a particular shape, then people who accidentally wave their hand are violating the law? how ridiculous is that?

intellectual property law seems to tacitly acknowledge this, because there's an arbitrary limit on length of ownership. the law admits that ultimately the only reason we're allowing someone to control an intellectual work is because we eventually want it to pass into the public domain. my claim is that the intellectual property paradigm is a completely stupid way to do this.
we've already talked about quadratic funding and how it can be used in a persistently democratic way. using assurance contracts and a more rigorous form of crowdfunding we can apply persistent funding to intellectual labor

### Democratic Prizes (already finished work)

someone's already completed something in private
they submit a description of what they've done, and make promises about its content. they also set a price
they convince people to pledge to it with money and weights
when its funded, its revealed and made public domain. there's a waiting period before the money changes hands where the funders can allege it's fraudulent

works for profit seeking entities, those with capital to get them through the process of doing the work

### Democratic Grants (proposed future work)

someone has an idea for specific work to do
they submit a description, and a timesliced budget with milestones. they also choose a reward amount they get at the end for success
they convince people to pledge to it with money and weights
when its funded, the money is released timeslice by timeslice, and the funders can vote in a commitment every cycle whether to continue to the next cycle. if the project is canceled the remaining money is refunded.
if the project is successful the creators get the final reward
if they go overschedule they eat into the reward amount until it's gone. if the money runs out then they have to pitch a new continuation project

the original proposals for ideas can of course come from the public rather than creators.

## Wealth Taxes

Let's imagine a society with one extremely wealthy person, and a bunch of poor people. Let's say the government in this society fully enforces a naive idea of property rights. Let's say this society is democratic, even persistently democratic, but its constitution prevents taxes from taking an unequal percentage of wealth from any member.
It's pretty obvious the extremely wealthy person will be the dictator of this society, regardless of the democratic structure. If a very wealthy person can pay most of society 3x their yearly income every year for as long as they keep doing whatever the wealthy person says, then whatever they want will happen. Even if people get tired of them, it will be easy for that person to just buy out enough of the group or the collaborators of the group, so their strength won't be enough to actually do anything.
An even simpler statement: how many people with guns, or people operating the justice system, can this person buy off?

We're also assuming that if someone was really able to accrue that much wealth, it wasn't because they really made that massive a marginal contribution to society. They did it by leveraging some vulnerability in our systems of ownership that allowed them to exert undue leverage over others. A tax like this is the failsafe mechanism, something that will always kick in and correct things if we don't happen to catch something at a lower level.

a bunch of our tax designs suck, partially because they're regressive and unfair, but mostly because they're so easy to evade. income taxes are particularly really stupid. obviously because of the capital gains loophole, but also just because making an income isn't an inherently externality producing event. making income doesn't impose any burden on society.


The idea is to structure a continuous S curve function such that the inflection point in the curve represents a safe level of wealth, an amount that doesn't give the owner enough social power to distort markets or institutions, because they don't have enough marginal leverage over others.
we want the curve to reshape according to the inequality and purchasing power, or the amount of latent marginal leverage, in the society. so if a society has corrected and is healthy, then wealth taxes aren't as much of a thing
if someone makes $10,000, and someone offers them a bribe of $50,000, then the offerer kinda owns this person now. they're offering to move them from crippling poverty to merely laborious poverty. in contrast if someone makes $100,000 and they're offered a bribeof $50,000, then that's attractive sure, but that person can much more easily say "eh, I'm good" if there's something unsavory or troubling about the offer. it is more likely they're more worried about social standing or other intangible things than the person with $10,000
the presence of extremely desperate people alongside extremely wealthy people is literally dangerous for everyone.

I'm not sure what math makes this all make sense, I'm more proposing an interesting set of principles and a design challenge








and of course, wouldn't it be nice just to merge with an existing party instead of making a new one! of course, the requirement of a completely persistently democratic structure is a hard line we shouldn't be willing to cross, so any organization we merge with would have to take up that idea
in terms of membership structure, it seems simple, because any cooperative must ask its members to support the cooperative in some way, members either pay some set membership dues or do some kind of volunteering. these two things could be compensated using the [user defined organization](TODO) mechanism, where paying membership dues or performing volunteer hours grants decaying weights. there should be a limit to the maximum monthly dues, if we're going to try to court larger donations the benefits should only be intangible and social in nature. the constitutional kernel can define a maximum monthly donation and set a hardcoded hourly amount of weights for volunteering.
members gain voting rights, and can come to member meetings and gatherings.

there are lots of decisions to make, and I don't think the best way for them to be figured out is for me to sit alone and try to figure them all out.

<!--
- a simplified tax system, with democratically counterbalanced harberger taxes at the center, and then democratically chosen externality taxes on anything that fell into an "interfering" area of rights. also, with the democratically counterbalanced harberger taxes allowing some kind of "lockin" mechanism that enables some land to be semi-permanently protected, representing the reality that the destruction/exploitation of most natural treasures would be inherenly irreversible and so the legal mechanism that protects them should be as well.
  by allowing democratic weights to be used to offset harberger taxes, or to inflation fund democratic projects, we've essentially created a way for economic value to exchange with all other forms of social utility. that's essential, since the biggest potential problem with harberger taxes is that they only account for economic utility and discard all others.

- bottom up self associating administrative districts, or holistic districts

- a democratically controlled monetary system, wherein the same weights used in elections and the harberger tax can be used to produce inflation funding, but as time goes on the inflation gets more expensive. the system's default state is 0% inflation

- refer to theories of rights and the "fair exchange" idea from above.

- abolishing intellectual property with the crowdsell mechanism and quadratic funding. intellectual *labor* instead. intellectual property isn't like normal property, because its *intrinsic utility* (although *maybe* not its market price utility) actually *increases* with its increased social use (generally). this means that our current property-based regimes are inherently fictional and inefficient, and only really exist to enable capitalistic extraction. intellectual property is probably the chief enabler of current inequality, because it's entirely arbitrary and absolute. someone can own *an idea* and use that as an immense leverage point to extract wealth from society. also, investigating how the crowdsell mechanism would interact with just normal publicly (quadratically) funded research. also, investigating how it would change the stucture of the economy, and lend itself greatly to much much smaller profit-seeking innovation companies (which are perfectly suited to thrive in a fluid university described below) alongside larger member cooperative administrative companies.

- using these ideas of efficient democratic ownership as the basis of a universal basic income. essentially what we've done is instead of merely bolstering labor in the fight between labor and capital, we've *subsumed* capital *by* labor. we can create a society where everyone is part of the ownership class and benefits from the passive income. this is especially crucial (and more possible!) because of the portent of automation. if we don't create a society of democratic ownership, inequality will produce either a crushing techo-feudalism, or a terrifying eradication scenario.

- it's possible for people to use their democratic weights to gain increased access to collective resources. Since we're already using them as a means of mediating access to influence and land, it makes sense to do so with things like healthcare or other kinds of resources. The goal in such a system then is to raise the floor of guaranteed access by increasing budgets or merely investing in innovation.

- decentralizing justice and policing, by having "justice tribes" that represent everyone and bring grievances against other tribes, with some randomly selected panel of other outside justice tribes acting as mediators/arbiters. also, restorative justice?

- decentralizing the military and public defense, through some similar mechanism as above, with some kind of coming-of-age ritual military service thing that intentionally gets people out of their communities into far-away places to serve them, and is focused on producing compassionate and learned warrior "monks" rather than brainwashing people into being a mindless cog in the military machine.

- a better version of esperanto, and having the whole world fully embrace a global trade language.
-->











# Economic Activism, and the Path To a Global Persistently Democratic Mega Cooperative

there's an inherently adversarial relationship between the capital investors in a business and their customers. you know what I'm talking about, because you feel this tug of war every time you are trying to deal with a for-profit entity. you're trying to maximize the amount you can get from them by getting more for your money, and they're trying to get more of your money for doing as little as they can for you.

this adversarial relationship shows itself in many ways. since a for-profit entity has no reason to be concerned about your real welfare, only your buying decisions, they have to be legally forced not to lie to you, to harm you against your will, to take advantage of your weaknesses. We've seen this in many ways. companies find our psychological weak points, our lowest instincts and fears, and use them against us. they weaponize advertising to scare us with far away dangers or the fear that other people are more powerful or desirable than we are. they convince us to buy things that don't actually make us happy because we're avoiding the fear, uncertainty, and doubt they intentionally planted in our minds. and of course profit seeking has no concern with our shared surroundings, our air, our water, our forests and mountains, our culture and politics.

usually the only way we can think of to control these profit seeking entities is to use our governments. but we routinely find that we don't have enough control over our governments, and since these profit seeking entities have slowly taken control of such a massive majority of the useful land and resources and capital, they're able to exert almost perfect control over the institutions we created to serve all of us.

there's a surprisingly simple solution to this problem. why don't we just cut out the middleman? why assume that we need these profit seeking companies to run our economy and provide the things we all need, when we can just provide the things we need ourselves?

member cooperatives are private institutions that are democratically owned and controlled by their members, normal customers who have created the institution just because they want it to exist. Credit unions are the classic example, they're banks that are owned by their account holders, simply because the account holders require the services of a bank, and don't want to constantly fight with a profit-seeking bank.

cooperatives are an extremely powerful model that combines the best aspects of non-profit charities and for-profit companies

when comparing two institutions that offer the same services but are different in that one is owned by profit seeking investors and the other cooperatively by customers, the cooperative will always have a structural competitive advantage since all profits will always be reinvested in improved quality or lower prices. however this will only be true if the cooperative is managed correctly! luckily a cooperative that's already self-sustaining and a large mature institution can use the exact same *internal* incentive systems that for-profit companies use, so there's no reason why cooperatives can't be managed just as well as any other institution.

given all this, you're probably wondering why member cooperatives aren't the dominant model in the entire economy. partially they are! in many countries cooperative banks have the majority of market share.

however there are a few reasons why this isn't true in basically every industry and every country. and of course there are some pockets of the economy that probably wouldn't function best as cooperatives, [read this post about the future economy we imagine](TODO)
<!-- cooperative management and maintenance alongside for-profit crowdsell innovation. an individual laborer can never have the same duplicable leverage as a knowledge worker or owner. however ownership and management is best deployed cooperatively, so the only thing left for true profit-seeking is knowledge work, the place where real innovation leverage occurs -->

obviously the problem of ineffective democratic systems which made it too difficult for members to exert control and demand their cooperatives fight harder on their behalf. persistent democracy is a clean solution to that problem, and we can experiment with ever better systems.
capital investment problem and how that's just a distorted power imbalance
systemic suppression by inefficient laws

so we need to be clever and ruthless. if the laws set aside for cooperatives are nothing more than a playpen meant to control our efforts, then we'll ignore the playpen and fight the corporations on their own terms. if the law privileges the formation of for-profit companies, then we'll make a company that's for-profit in name only, and just enshrine our cooperative values in its articles of incorporation and bylaws.

it's time for us to realize something important. in order to have any real hope of reforming our societies, we have to regain our *economic* power. we have to engage in *economic* activism, using democratic structures to retake enough land, resources, and capital that we can stand head to head with the existing corporate behemoths and then change our laws to take away the unfair advantages those corporate behemoths used to gain their position.
corporatism has used unfair laws to steal the power of logic, science, technology, and industrial scale away from us. many think those things are inherently dangerous or corrosive, but that's not true. science and scale aren't the problem, profit-seeking ownership and control is the problem. if we democratically use those powerful tools then we can point them towards shared prosperity and real human flourishing instead of short-sighted extraction.
we have to stop waiting for our government to be reformed to start changing things. building our own private organization is something we don't have to ask permission for, and no one can stop us without stopping all the other private organizations as well.

<!-- our cooperative constitutions should disallow dissolving, selling, or demutualizing the entity. the constitutional kernel should enshrine persistent democracy irrevocably, so the only way for this organization to die is for it to lose all its members -->


I'm looking for help. I'm especially looking for:

- A legal engineer. I don't use the word lawyer because I don't want someone who thinks the law is immutable or unnavigable. I don't want someone who'll say *if* something can be done, I want someone who'll figure out *how* it can be done. There are many tricky aspects to navigating the law, and I need someone sharp and determined who can lead the fight in hacking through the jungle.
- A designer. someone with keen sense of style who knows how to make things beautiful. no particular specialties are required, but you have to be able to learn and adapt and apply your eye to different domains quickly, and learn new tools to better collaborate with engineers.

I'm looking for awesome people, people who learn fast, have passion for this work, who have a track record of doing things they aren't required to do, and who are true believers in democracy and shared prosperity.

And I'll build the technology.

I'm not sure what to build first! It would be nice to start with something that people are already willing to pay for, something where early adopters are already present, something that either hasn't been built already or the existing for-profit versions don't have real moats (social media seems like it has moats, but honestly the services have all become so poisonous that the moat is meaningless at this point)





when you think about it, a democratic government is just a cooperative, one where membership is determined by being a taxable citizen and the shared goods being produced are things like a system of rights and justice, common beneficial institutions and services, land based infrastructure, etc.





Corporatism and consumerism have been obvious disasters for society. There's a clear adversarial relationship between capital investors and both workers and customers. We'll talk about the relationship between workers and customers, but for now let's simplify things and just talk about investors and customers.

There's a pretty obvious solution to this problem, member cooperatives

However there's a reason they haven't taken off.

Here's how persistent democracy can be the foundation of a radically different cooperative.

I'm starting such an institution. Once something like this gets off the ground and is self-sustaining and growing it can operate like any normal company, but of course acting on the wishes of members rather than investors.

We have an opportunity to create a new kind of cooperative. It doesn't seem to me like cooperatives are aggressive enough about expanding to further serve their members. I want to create an *activist* cooperative, one with the explicit mission of attacking corporatism and consumerism in all its forms and comprehensively improving its members lives by expanding into ever more sectors of the economy.
I want this cooperative to have startup energy. At first we'll follow the lead of companies like [oxide computer](TODO) by paying all our employees the same amount including me, since I just want a high energy team to build reusable organizational tools
I honestly don't know what the first thing should be though! we need a first service that is amenable to a cooperative structure, is relatively small so we can get it off the ground with a small team, and that early adopters are excited to pay for in order to control it democratically
honestly a potentially great first thing is a purely digital credit union
there are many annoying legal questions to answer. if the laws about cooperatives made sense we'd just make a single organization and be done with it. but we might have to do something tricky, like have a separate research and development company that's paid by a credit union, and R&D company is chartered to be governed by the wishes of members in the credit union?
a digital credit union seems like a perfect first thing, since its already proven it can work, and its a financial institution meaning we can gain knowledge about the financial system and use that position as leverage in efforts to fund other parts of the business

I want to bring some startup energy to cooperatives! I want to be intense and determined and monomaniacally focused on achieving these goals. I don't want to work with people who just want a chill job where it's fun to hang out with your coworkers. if you haven't noticed, I'm exactly the opposite of chill! I'm super intense!
I don't know how to do any of these things (fundraising, operations management, financial modeling, market research, design), but I do know how to build all levels of a robust web application, and a fair amount about formal verification.

you can't achieve a huge goal all in one step, it's impossible. you need to build structures and then teams capable of sustainably marching through many small milestones. you need to start with something that can sustain itself long enough to find a foothold.
that's what this strategy is all about. it's about creating the seed institutions, structured using these uniquely powerful democratic systems and founded with a cultural commitment to aggressively pursuing our shared goals rather than settling into a comfortable rhythm. it's about growing these institutional seeds to expand to more and more parts of our society and economy, solving more problems and unraveling as much exploitation, extraction, environmental destruction, waste, and greed as we possibly can.

I'm done asking for permission, but I am asking for help. if you have money, time, knowledge, or skills to give to this mission, please reach out to me. I'm looking for amazing people to plant seeds that can grow into a worldwide transformation of our economy and society.
